The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Works of William Shakespeare [Cambridge
Edition] [9 vols.], by William Shakespeare

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Works of William Shakespeare [Cambridge Edition] [9 vols.]
       Introduction and Publisher's Advertising

Author: William Shakespeare

Editor: William George Clark
        John Glover

Release Date: October 26, 2007 [EBook #23041]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WORKS OF SHAKESPEARE ***




Produced by Louise Hope, Jonathan Ingram and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)





[Transcriber's Note:

This e-text contains the introductory material (44 pages) and the
publisher's advertising (16 pages) from Volume I of the nine-volume
1863 Cambridge edition of Shakespeare. The five plays from this
volume, with their notes, will each be produced as a free-standing
e-text.

Numerals written as subscripts are shown inline as F1, F2, Q1....
Except for footnotes and illustrations, all brackets are in the
original.

In the publisher's advertising, the page breaks have been retained
and are shown as a double row of asterisks.]




_THE WORKS_

of

WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE.




  [Illustration (Publisher's Device)]




  THE WORKS

  of

  WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE


  Edited by

  WILLIAM GEORGE CLARK, M.A.
  Fellow and Tutor of Trinity College, and Public Orator
  in the University of Cambridge;

  and JOHN GLOVER, M.A.
  Librarian Of Trinity College, Cambridge.


  _VOLUME I._


  Cambridge and London:
  MACMILLAN AND CO.
  1863.




  Cambridge:
  Printed by C. J. Clay, M.A.
  at the University Press.




  To His Grace

  THE DUKE OF DEVONSHIRE, K.G.
  Chancellor Of The University Of Cambridge.

  THIS EDITION
  of
  _THE WORKS OF SHAKESPEARE_

  Is Respectfully Dedicated
  by
  THE EDITORS.




CONTENTS.

  [The e-text numbers for the plays from this edition are shown
  in brackets.]

                                                  PAGE
  The Preface                                       ix

  THE TEMPEST [23042]                                3
  Notes to the Tempest                              77

  THE TWO GENTLEMEN OF VERONA [23043]               83
  Notes to the Two Gentlemen of Verona             157

  Introduction to the Merry Wives of Windsor       163
  THE MERRY WIVES OF WINDSOR [23044]               165
  Notes to the Merry Wives of Windsor              253
  A Pleasant Conceited Comedy
      of Syr John Falstaffe, &c.                   257

  MEASURE FOR MEASURE [23045]                      295
  Notes to Measure for Measure                     391

  THE COMEDY OF ERRORS [23046]                     399
  Notes to the Comedy of Errors                    462




PREFACE.


The main rules which we proposed to ourselves in undertaking this
Edition are as follows:

1. To base the text on a thorough collation of the four Folios and of
all the Quarto editions of the separate plays, and of subsequent
editions and commentaries.

2. To give all the results of this collation in notes at the foot of
the page, and to add to these conjectural emendations collected and
suggested by ourselves, or furnished to us by our correspondents, so as
to give the reader in a compact form a complete view of the existing
materials out of which the text has been constructed, or may be emended.

3. In all plays of which there is a Quarto edition differing from the
received text to such a degree that the variations cannot be shown in
foot-notes, to print the text of the Quarto _literatim_ in a smaller
type after the received text.

4. To number the lines in each scene separately, so as to facilitate
reference.

5. To add at the end of each play a few notes, (_a_) to explain such
variations in the text of former editions as could not be intelligibly
expressed in the limits of a foot-note, (_b_) to justify any deviation
from our ordinary rule either in the text or the foot-notes, and
(_c_) to illustrate some passage of unusual difficulty or interest.

6. To print the Poems, edited on a similar plan, at the end of the
Dramatic Works.

An edition of Shakespeare on this plan has been for several years in
contemplation, and has been the subject of much discussion. That such an
edition was wanted seemed to be generally allowed, and it was thought
that Cambridge afforded facilities for the execution of the task such as
few other places could boast of. The Shakespearian collection given by
Capell to the Library of Trinity College supplied a mass of material
almost unrivalled in amount and value, and in some points unique; and
there, too, might be found opportunities for combined literary labour,
without which the work could not be executed at all. At least, if
undertaken by one person only, many years of unremitting diligence would
be required for its completion.

The first step towards the realization of the project was taken in the
spring of 1860, when the first act of _Richard the Second_ was printed
by way of specimen, with a preface signed 'W. G. Clark' and 'H. R.
Luard,'[1] where the principles, on which the proposed Edition should be
based, were set forth with the view 'of obtaining opinions as to the
feasibility of the plan, and suggestions as to its improvement.'

All the persons who answered this appeal expressed their warm approval
of the general plan, and many favoured us with suggestions as to
details, which we have either adopted, or at least not rejected without
careful and respectful consideration.

Since our work was commenced, we have learned that the need of such an
Edition has presented itself, independently, to the minds of many
literary men, and that a similar undertaking was recommended as long ago
as 1852, by Mr Bolton Corney, in _Notes and Queries_, Vol. VI. pp. 2, 3;
and again by a correspondent of the same journal who signs himself
'Este,' Vol. VIII. p. 362.

This concurrence of opinion leads us to hope that our Edition will be
found to supply a real want, while, at the same time, the novelty of its
plan will exempt us from all suspicion of a design to supersede, or even
compete with, the many able and learned Editors who have preceded us in
the same field.

We will first proceed to explain the principles upon which we have
prepared our text.


A. _With respect to the Readings._

The basis of all texts of Shakespeare must be that of the earliest
Edition of the collected plays, the Folio of 1623, which, for more easy
reference, we have designated F1[2]. This we have mainly adopted, unless
there exists an earlier edition in quarto, as is the case in more than
one half of the thirty-six plays. When the first Folio is corrupt, we
have allowed some authority to the emendations of F2 above subsequent
conjecture, and secondarily to F3 and F4; but a reference to our notes
will show that the authority even of F2 in correcting is very small.
Where we have Quartos of authority, their variations from F1 have been
generally accepted, except where they are manifest errors, and where the
text of the entire passage seems to be of an inferior recension to that
of the Folio. To show that the later Folios only corrected the first by
conjecture, we may instance two lines in _Midsummer Night's Dream_:

  Give me your neif, Mounsieur Mustard Seed.  IV. 1.

'Neif,' which is spelt 'niefe' in Qq F1, becomes 'newfe' in F2, 'newse'
and 'news' in F3 F4.

  And finds his trusty Thisby's mantle slain.  V. 1.

F1 omits 'trusty.' F2 makes up the line by inserting 'gentle.'

Where the Folios are all obviously wrong, and the Quartos also fail us,
we have introduced into the text several conjectural emendations;
especially we have often had recourse to Theobald's ingenuity. But it
must be confessed that a study of errors detracts very much from the
apparent certainty of conjectures, the causelessness of the blunders
warning us off the hope of restoring, by general principles or by
discovery of causes of error.

For example: in the _Midsummer Night's Dream_, I. 1,

  Or else it stood upon the choice of merit,

the reading of the Folios, is certainly wrong; but if we compare the
true reading preserved in the Quartos, 'the choice of friends,' we can
perceive no way to account for the change of 'friends' to 'merit,' by
which we might have retraced the error from 'merit' to 'friends.'
Nothing like the 'ductus literarum,' or attraction of the eye to a
neighbouring word, can be alleged here.

Hence though we have admitted conjectures sometimes, we have not done so
as often as perhaps will be expected. For, in the first place, we admit
none because we think it better rhythm or grammar or sense, unless we
feel sure that the reading of the Folio is altogether impossible. In the
second place, the conjecture must appear to us to be the only probable
one. If the defect can be made good in more ways than one equally
plausible, or, at least, equally possible, we have registered but not
adopted these improvements, and the reader is intended to make his own
selection out of the notes.

For example, in the _Merry Wives of Windsor_, II. 3. 80, we have assumed
Mr Dyce's conjecture, 'Cried I aim?' to be the only satisfactory reading
of a passage decidedly wrong; but in the same play, IV. 1. 63, 'Woman,
art thou lunaties?' as the error may equally possibly be evaded by
reading 'lunacies' with Rowe, and 'lunatics' with Capell, we have
retained the error.

The well-known canon of criticism, that of two readings 'ceteris
paribus' the more difficult is to be preferred, is not always to be
applied in comparing the readings of the Folios. For very frequently an
anomaly which would have been plausible on account of its apparent
archaism proves to be more archaic than Shakespeare, if the earlier
Quartos give the language of Shakespeare with more correctness. Ex.
_Midsummer Night's Dream_, III. 2: 'Scorn and derision never come in
tears' Qq; 'comes' Ff; and in the same play, IV. 1: 'O how mine eyes do
loath' Q1, altered to 'doth loath' in Q2 F1, and restored, evidently by
a grammatical reviser, to 'do loath' in F2 F3 F4. Again, I. 1: 'what all
but he do know,' Qq, is altered to 'doth know' in Ff.

This last error points to a very common anomaly in grammar; one which
seems almost to have become a rule, or, at any rate, a license in
Shakespeare's own time, that a verb shall agree in number with the
nominative intervening between the true governing noun and the verb.


B. _Grammar._

In general, we do not alter any passage merely because the grammar is
faulty, unless we are convinced that the fault of grammar was due to the
printer altogether, and not to Shakespeare. We look upon it as no part
of our task to improve the poet's grammar or correct his oversights:
even errors, such as those referred to in note (VII) to the _Two
Gentlemen of Verona_, and notes (I) and (X) to the _Merry Wives of
Windsor_, because we thought them to be Shakespeare's own blunders, have
been allowed to stand. But many phrases that are called bad grammar by
us, and rightly so called, were sanctioned by usage among the
contemporaries of Shakespeare, especially, no doubt, by the usage of
conversation, even among educated persons. And as a learned
correspondent (Dr B. Nicholson) remarks, this would naturally be the
style of English which Shakespeare would purposely use in dramatic
dialogue.

As examples of the anomalies of grammar sanctioned by Elizabethan usage
we may mention:--

Singular verbs, with plural nouns, especially when the verb precedes its
nominative:

  Hath all his ventures failed? What; not one hit?
                          _Merchant of Venice_, III. 2.

Nominatives for accusatives:

  She should this Angelo have married.
                      _Measure for Measure_, III. 1. 204.

And repeatedly 'who' for 'whom.'

Omission of prepositions:

  Most ignorant of what he's most assured.  _Ibid._ II. 2. 119.

  ------ which now you censure him.  _Ibid._ II. 1. 15.

The changes of accidence are less frequent than those of syntax, yet
such occur. In the Folios verbs ending in _d_ and _t_ are constantly
found making their second persons singular in _ds_ and _ts_ instead of
_d'st_ and _t'st_. This was a corruption coming into vogue about the
time of their publication, and in the earlier Quartos we frequently find
the correct form; for example, in _Midsummer Night's Dream_, V. 1:
'standst' in Q1 is corrupted to 'stands' in Q2 and in Ff. We have
therefore confidently replaced the correct form for the incorrect, even
without authority to back us; looking upon the variation as a corrupt
abbreviation of spelling.

But, in general, our practice has been not to alter the text, in order
to make the grammar conform to the fixed rules of modern English. A wide
latitude of speech was allowed in Shakespeare's age both as to spelling
and grammar.


C. _Orthography._

It was not without much consideration that we determined to adopt the
spelling of the nineteenth century. If we had any evidence as to
Shakespeare's own spelling, we should have been strongly inclined to
adopt it, but to attempt to reproduce it, by operating by rule upon the
texts that have come down to us, would be subjecting Shakespeare's
English to arbitrary laws, of which it never yet was conscious. This
argues no want of education on the part of Shakespeare; for if Lord
Bacon himself had rules for spelling, they were but few, as we may
easily perceive by inspection of his works published under his own eye.
But if we have not Shakespeare's own spelling to guide us, what other
spelling shall we adopt? Every student of Shakespeare has now an easy
opportunity of acquainting himself with the text of F1, by means of Mr
Booth's excellent reprint, and we are certain that not one of them will
consider the spelling of that volume intrinsically better than that of
our day. Rather more like Shakespeare's it certainly is, but we doubt
whether much is gained by such approximation, as long as it is short of
perfect attainment. Moreover, in many of the Plays there is a competing
claim to guide our spelling, put forward by an array of Quartos, of
earlier date than F1. To desert F1 for these, where they exist, would be
but an occasional, and at best an uncertain means of attaining the lost
spelling of Shakespeare, while the spelling of our volume would become
even more inconsistent than that of F1 itself. Add to this; there are
places, though, as has been seen, not many, where we have had to leave
the reading of F1 altogether. How then shall we spell the correction
which we substitute?


D. _Metre._

Corrections of metre are avoided even more carefully than those of
grammar. For the rules of prosody have undergone perhaps greater change
than those of grammar. There is no doubt that a system of versification
has taken root among us very different from that which was in use in the
earlier days of our poetry. The influence of classical prosody has
worked in a manner that could hardly have been expected. Quantity in the
sense in which the Greeks and Romans understood it, is altogether
foreign to our speech; and our poets, willing to imitate the verse
regulated by laws of quantity, have partially adopted those laws,
substituting for long syllables those that bear a stress of accent or
emphasis.

In Greek and Latin accent was essentially distinct from quantity, and
verse was regulated entirely by the latter. In the modern imitation of
classical metres, for want of appreciation of quantity, we go entirely
by accent or emphasis, and make precisely such verses as classical taste
eschewed. Thus we have learned to scan lines by iambuses, or rather by
their accentual imitations, and a perfect line would consist of ten
syllables, of which the alternate ones bore a rhythmical stress. These
iambuses may, under certain restrictions, be changed for 'trochees,' and
out of these two 'feet,' or their representatives, a metre, certainly
very beautiful, has grown up gradually, which attained perhaps its
greatest perfection in the verse of Pope. But the poets of this metre,
like renaissance architects, lost all perception of the laws of the
original artists, and set themselves, whenever it was possible, to
convert the original verses into such as their own system would have
produced. We see the beginnings of this practice even in the first
Folio, when there exist Quartos to exhibit it. In each successive Folio
the process has been continued. Rowe's few changes of F4 are almost all
in the same direction, and the work may be said to have been completed
by Hanmer. It is to be feared that a result of two centuries of such a
practice has been to bring about an idea of Shakespearian versification
very different from Shakespeare's. But we feel a hope that the number of
Shakespeare's students who can appreciate the true nature of the English
versification in our elder poets is increasing, and will increase more
as the opportunity is furnished them of studying Shakespeare himself.

Of course we do not mean to give here an essay on Shakespearian
versification. Those who would study it may best be referred to Capell,
in spite of the erroneous taste of his day, to Sidney Walker, and
especially, if they are earnest students, to Dr Guest's _History of
English Rhythms_.

We will only state some of the differences between Shakespearian
versification and that which has now become our normal prosody; namely,
such as have excited an ambition of correcting in later editors. There
is a large number of verses which a modern ear pronounces to want their
first unaccented syllable. The following we quote as they appear in F1,
in the opening of the _Two Gentlemen of Verona_:

  No, I will not, for it boots thee not.  I. 1. 28.

  Fire that's closest kept burns most of all.  I. 2. 30.

  Is't near dinner-time? I would it were.  I. 2. 67.

These lines are all corrected by editors; and it is evident that there
would be little trouble in altering all such lines wherever they occur:
or they may be explained away, as for instance in the second cited,
'fire' doubtless is sometimes pronounced as a dissyllable. Yet to
attempt correction or explanation wherever such lines occur would be
ill-spent labour. A very impressive line in the _Tempest_ is similarly
scanned:

  Twelve year since, Miranda, twelve year since.  I. 2. 53.

Where we are rightly told that 'year' may be a dissyllable. Yet that one
word should bear two pronunciations in one line is far more improbable
than that the unaccented syllable before 'twelve' is purposely omitted
by the poet; and few readers will not acknowledge the solemn effect of
such a verse. As another example with a contrary effect, of impulsive
abruptness, we may take a line in _Measure for Measure_:

  Quick, dispatch, and send the head to Angelo.  IV. 3. 88.

This last example is also an instance of another practice, by modern
judgement a license, viz. making a line end with two unaccented
'extrametrical' syllables.

Two very effective lines together, commencing similarly to the last, are
in the same Play:

  Take him hence; to the rack with him! We'll touse you
  Joint by joint, but we will know his purpose.  V. 1. 309, 310.

Another irregularity is a single strong syllable commencing a line
complete without it. This might often be printed in a line by itself.
For example:

  Ay,
  And we're betrothed: nay more, our marriage-hour--
      _Two Gentlemen of Verona_, II. 4, 175.

Another irregularity is the insertion of syllables in the middle of
lines. The dramatic verse is doubtless descended from the Old English
decasyllables of Chaucer, and that his verse was divided actually into
two sections is evinced by the punctuation of some MSS. The _licenses_
accorded to the beginnings and endings of the whole verse were also
allowed, with some modification, to the end and beginnings of these
_sections_, and accordingly, in early poetry, many verses will appear to
a modern reader to have a syllable too many or too few in the part where
his ear teaches him to place a cæsura. Exactly similarly, but more
sparingly, syllables are omitted or inserted at the central pause of
Shakespeare's verse, especially when this pause is not merely metrical,
but is in the place of a stop of greater or less duration; and most
freely when the line in question is broken by the dialogue.

The following examples of a superfluous syllable at the middle pause are
taken out of the beginning of the _Tempest_:

  Obey, and be attentive. Canst thou remember?  I. 2. 38.

  But blessedly help hither. O, my heart bleeds.  I. 2. 63.

  Without a parallel; those being all my study.  I. 2. 74.

  With all prerogative:--hence his ambition growing.  I. 2. 105.

The extra syllables may be at the commencement of the second section:

  He was indeed the Duke; out o' the substitution.  I. 2. 103.

And the following are defective of a syllable:

  Dashes the fire out. O, I have suffered.  I. 2. 5.

  Make the prize light. One word more; I charge thee.  I. 2. 452.

To these 'licenses' we may add verses sometimes with one and sometimes
with two additional feet, and many half verses, and some a foot too
short. When these inequalities are allowed, the reader will perceive
much simpler and more general methods of scanning some lines supposed to
be unmetrical than the Procrustean means adopted by Sidney Walker for
reducing or multiplying the number of syllables in words.


E. _Punctuation._

We have now to state our practice of punctuation. The Folio and other
editions, starting with very different principles from those that guide
the punctuation of this day, have acted on those principles with
exceeding incorrectness. Questions are marked and unnoticed almost at
random; stops are inserted in the ends of lines fatal to the sense. In
fact, in many places, we may almost say that a complete want of points
would mislead us less than the punctuation of the Folios. The
consequence is, that our punctuation is very little dependent upon the
Folios and Quartos, but generally follows the practice which has taken
possession of the text of Shakespeare, under the arrangement of the best
editors, from Pope to Dyce and Staunton. Only for an obvious improvement
have we altered the punctuation on our own judgement, and in most cases
the alteration is recorded in the notes.

One thing remains to be said in reference to our text. It is well known,
that in James the First's reign, a statute was passed for exscinding
profane expressions from plays. In obedience to this many passages in
the Folios have been altered with an over-scrupulous care. When we have
seen the metre, or, as is sometimes the case, even the sense marred by
these changes, and the original contains no offensive profanity, we have
recalled Shakespeare's words.


Our object in the foot-notes has been (1) to state the authority upon
which a received reading rests, (2) to give all different readings
adopted into the text by other editors, and (3) to give all emendations
suggested by commentators.

When no authority is mentioned for the reading of the text, it must be
understood that all the Folios agree in it, as well as all editors
previous to the one mentioned, as authority for an alteration. Thus, in
the _Comedy of Errors_, III. 1. 71, '_cake here_] _cake_ Capell'
indicates that 'cake here' is the reading of the four Folios, of Rowe,
Pope, Theobald Hanmer, Warburton, and Johnson.

Mere differences of spelling are not noticed, except (1) in corrupt or
disputed passages, where the 'ductus literarum' is important as a help
towards the determination of the true text, and (2) when the variation
is interesting etymologically or characteristic of a particular edition.

In the same way, differences of punctuation are recorded only when they
make a difference in the sense, or when they may serve as a guide to the
restoration of some corrupt, or the explanation of some difficult,
passage.

Misprints also are passed over as a general rule. We have noticed them
occasionally, when they appeared to be remarkable as indicating the
amount of error of which the old printers were capable.

We have endeavoured faithfully to record any variation of reading,
however minute (except, as before said, mere differences of spelling or
punctuation), adopted by any editor, and to give that editor's name.
Sometimes, however, we have passed over in silence merely arbitrary
rearrangements of the metre made in passages where no change was
required and no improvement effected.

In recording conjectures, we have excepted only (1) those which were so
near some other reading previously adopted or suggested, as to be
undeserving of separate record, and (2) a few (of Becket, Jackson, and
others) which were palpably erroneous. Even of these we have given a
sufficient number to serve as samples.

We will now proceed to explain the notation employed in the foot-notes,
which, in some cases, the necessity of compressing may have rendered
obscure.

The four Folios are designated respectively by the letters F1, F2, F3,
and F4, and the quarto editions of separate plays, in each case, by the
letters Q1, Q2, Q3, &c.

When one or more of the Quartos differ so widely from the Folios that a
complete collation is impossible, the letters which designate them are
put between brackets, for the sake of keeping this difference before the
mind of the reader. Thus, in the _Merry Wives of Windsor_, the two
earliest Quartos differ widely from the Folios, while the third Quarto
(1630) is printed from the first Folio. Hence, they are designated thus:
I. 4. 20, _Cain_] F3 F4. _Kane_ (Q1 Q2). _Caine_ F1 Q3 F2.

When no authority is given for the reading in the text, it is to be
understood that it is derived from such of the Folios as are not
subsequently mentioned. Thus, in the _Comedy of Errors_, II. 2. 203,
_the eye_] _thy eye_ F2 F3 indicates that F1 and F4 agree in reading
'the eye.'

In the same scene, line 191, the note '_or_] _and_ Theobald' means, that
the four Folios, followed by Rowe and Pope, agree in reading 'or.'

When the difference between the reading adopted and that given in one or
more of the Folios is a mere difference of spelling, it has not been
thought worth while to record the name of the first editor who
modernized it: for instance, in the _Two Gentlemen of Verona_, II. 6.
35, the note is: _counsel_] _counsaile_ F1 F2. _councel_ F3.
_council_ F4.

We have given at full the name of the editor who first introduced a
particular reading, without recording which of his successors adopted
it. Thus, in _Measure for Measure_, III. 1. 138, 'grant' for 'shield' is
read by Pope, Theobald, Hanmer, Warburton, and others, but the first
only is mentioned: '_shield_] F1. _shield:_ F2 F3 F4. _grant_ Pope.'

The conjectures made by annotators or by editors, but not introduced by
them into the text, are distinguished by the addition of 'conj.,' as
'Farmer conj.,' 'Johnson conj.' &c. 'Steevens (Farmer conj.)' indicates
that the reading in question was first suggested by Farmer, and first
introduced into the text by Steevens. If, however, the person who first
made the conjecture, afterwards became an editor, and gave it in his own
text, while, in the mean time, it had been adopted by some other editor,
the 'conj.' is omitted. Thus, for example, 'Theobald (Warburton)' shows
that Warburton was the first to propose such and such a change, that
Theobald first incorporated it in the text, and that Warburton
afterwards gave it in the text of his own edition. We have designated
the readings derived from Mr Collier's corrected copy of the second
folio thus: 'Collier MS.' not 'Collier MS. conj.,' as in this case we
could consult brevity without danger of misleading any one.

We have arranged the names both of Editors and of Commentators (as far
as was possible) in order of time. It has frequently happened that
several persons have hit on the same conjecture independently. In such
cases we have assigned it to the earliest, determining the priority by
the date of publication.

The metrical arrangement of each passage is marked in the notes by
printing each word which commences a line with an initial capital
letter. In the Folios, many substantives, other than proper names or
titles, are printed with initial capitals; but, in order to avoid
ambiguity, we have generally made our quotations conform, in this
respect, to the modern usage.

We had originally intended to give in our Preface a catalogue raisonné
of all the editions of our author and other books used by us in the
preparation of the present work, but this labour has been fortunately
spared us by Mr Bohn's reissue of Lowndes's _Bibliographer's Manual_,
the eighth part of which contains a full and accurate account of
Shakespearian literature. To that work we refer our readers for more
complete bibliographical details, and propose to confine ourselves to
some remarks on the critical value of the principal editions and
commentaries. We have, of course, confined our collation to those
editions which seemed to possess an independent value of their own. Mr
Bohn enumerates two hundred and sixty-two different editions of
Shakespeare. It was therefore a matter of necessity to make a selection.
In the following remarks we pass briefly in review the editions which we
have habitually consulted.

Whenever any commentary was known to us to exist in a separate form, we
have always, if possible, procured it. In some few instances, we have
been obliged to take the references at second-hand.

The first Folio (F1), 1623, contains all the plays usually found in
modern editions of Shakespeare, except _Pericles_. It was 'published
according to the True Originall Copies,' and 'set forth' by his
'friends' and 'fellows,' John Heminge and Henry Condell, the author 'not
having the fate common with some to be exequutor to his own writings.'

In an address 'To the great variety of Readers' following the dedication
to the Earls of Pembroke and Montgomery, the following passage occurs:

'It had bene a thing, we confesse, worthie to have bene wished, that the
Author himselfe had liv'd to have set forth, and overseen his owne
writings; But since it hath bin ordain'd otherwise, and he by death
departed from that right, we pray you do not envie his Friends, the
office of their care, and paine, to have collected & publish'd them; and
so to have publish'd them, as where (before) you were abus'd with
diverse stolne and surreptitious copies, maimed, and deformed by the
frauds and stealthes of injurious impostors, that expos'd them: even
those are now offer'd to your view cur'd, and perfect of their limbes;
and all the rest, absolute in their numbers, as he conceived them. Who,
as he was a happie imitator of Nature, was a most gentle expresser of
it. His mind and hand went together: And what he thought, he uttered
with that easinesse, that wee have scarse received from him a blot in
his papers.'

The natural inference to be drawn from this statement is, that all the
separate editions of Shakespeare's plays were 'stolen,' 'surreptitious,'
and 'imperfect,' and that all those published in the Folio were printed
from the author's own manuscripts. But it can be proved to demonstration
that several of the plays in the Folio were printed from earlier Quarto
editions, and that in other cases the Quarto is more correctly printed
or from a better MS. than the Folio text, and therefore of higher
authority. For example, in _Midsummer Night's Dream_, in _Love's
Labour's Lost_, and in _Richard the Second_, the reading of the Quarto
is almost always preferable to that of the Folio, and in _Hamlet_ we
have computed that the Folio, when it differs from the Quartos, differs
for the worse in forty-seven places, while it differs for the better in
twenty at most.

As the 'setters forth' are thus convicted of a 'suggestio falsi' in
one point, it is not improbable that they may have been guilty of
the like in another. Some of the plays may have been printed not from
Shakespeare's own manuscript, but from transcripts made from them for
the use of the theatre. And this hypothesis will account for strange
errors found in some of the plays--errors too gross to be accounted for
by the negligence of a printer, especially if the original MS. was as
unblotted as Heminge and Condell describe it to have been. Thus too we
may explain the great difference in the state of the text as found in
different plays. It is probable that this deception arose not from
deliberate design on the part of Heminge and Condell,--whom as having
been Shakespeare's friends and fellows we like to think of as honourable
men,--but partly at least from want of practice in composition, and from
the wish rather to write a smart preface in praise of the book than to
state the facts clearly and simply. Or the preface may have been written
by some literary man in the employment of the publishers, and merely
signed by the two players.

Be this as it may, their duties as editors were probably limited to
correcting and arranging the manuscripts and sending them to the press.
The 'overseeing' of which they speak, probably meant a revision of the
MSS., not a correction of the press, for it does not appear that there
were any proof sheets in those days sent either to author or editor.
Indeed we consider it as certain that, after a MS. had been sent to
press, it was seen only by the printers and one or more correctors of
the press, regularly employed by the publishers for that purpose[3].

The opinions of critics have varied very much as to the merits of the
first Folio, some praising it as among the most correct, and others
blaming it as one of the most incorrect editions of its time. The truth
seems to be that it is of very varied excellence, differing from time to
time according to the state of the MS. from which it was printed, the
skill of the compositor, and the diligence of the corrector. There is
the widest difference, for instance, between the text of the _Two
Gentlemen of Verona_ and that of _All's well that ends well_.

As is the case with most books of that time[4], different copies of the
first Folio are found to vary here and there; generally, however, in a
single letter only. It is probable that no one copy exactly corresponds
with any other copy. We have indicated these variations, wherever they
were known to us, in a note either at the foot of the page or at the end
of each play.

A reprint of the first Folio, not free from inaccuracies, was published
in 1807. A second reprint is now in course of publication by Mr Lionel
Booth. The first part, containing the Comedies, has already appeared. It
is probably the most correct reprint ever issued.

The second Folio (F2) is a reprint of the first, preserving the same
pagination. It differs, however, from the first in many passages,
sometimes widely, sometimes slightly, sometimes by accident, sometimes
by design. The emendations are evidently conjectural, and though
occasionally right, appear more frequently to be wrong. They deserve no
more respect than those of other guessers, except such as is due to
their author's familiar acquaintance with the language and customs of
Shakespeare's day, and possible knowledge of the acted plays.

Capell's copy of the second Folio has been of great use to us in our
collations. He has annotated the margin with a multitude of marks in red
ink,--conventional symbols indicating where and how it differs from the
first. We have hardly in a single instance found his accuracy at fault.

The third Folio (F3) was first published in 1663, and reissued in the
following year with a new title-page[5], and with seven additional
plays, viz.: _Pericles, Prince of Tyre_: _The London Prodigal_: _The
History of the Life and Death of Thomas Lord Cromwell_: _The History of
Sir John Oldcastle, the good Lord Cobham_: _The Puritan Widow_: _A
Yorkshire Tragedy_: and _The Tragedy of Locrine_. With regard to the
plays which it contains in common with the former Folios, it is on the
whole a tolerably faithful reprint of the second, correcting, however,
some obvious errors, making now and then an uncalled-for alteration, and
occasionally modernizing the spelling of a word. The printer of course
has committed some errors of his own.

The fourth Folio (F4) was printed from the third, but with a different
pagination, in 1685. The spelling is very much modernized, but we have
not been able to detect any other evidence of editorial care.

The first octavo edition was that of Nicholas Rowe, published in 1709,
dedicated to the Duke of Somerset, in words which we take pleasure in
recording: ''Tis the best security a poet can ask for to be sheltered
under that great name which presides over one of the most famous
Universities of Europe.' It contained all the plays in the fourth Folio
in the same order, except that the seven spurious plays were transferred
from the beginning to the end. The poems were added also.

It is evident that Rowe took the fourth Folio as the text from which his
edition was printed, and it is almost certain that he did not take the
trouble to refer to, much less to collate, any of the previous Folios or
Quartos. It seems, however, while the volume containing _Romeo and
Juliet_ was in the press he learned the existence of a Quarto edition,
for he has printed the prologue given in the Quartos and omitted in the
Folios, at the end of the play. He did not take the trouble to compare
the text of the Quarto with that of F4. When any emendation introduced
by him in the text coincides with the reading of F1, as sometimes
happens, we are convinced that it is an accidental coincidence. Being,
however, a man of natural ability and taste he improved the text by some
happy guesses, while, from overhaste and negligence, he left it still
deformed by many palpable errors. The best part of the work is that with
which his experience of the stage as a dramatic poet had made him
familiar. In many cases he first prefixed to the play a list of dramatis
personæ, he supplied the defects of the Folios in the division and
numbering of Acts and Scenes, and in the entrances and exits of
characters. He also corrected and further modernized the spelling, the
punctuation, and the grammar.

A characteristic specimen of blunders and corrections occurs in the
_Comedy of Errors_, V. 1. 138.

_important_] F1 _impoteant_ F2. _impotent_ F3 F4. _all-potent_ Rowe.

A second Edition, 9 Volumes 12mo, was published in 1714.

Pope's edition in six volumes, 4to, was completed in 1715. On the
title-page we read, 'The Works of Shakespeare, in six volumes.' The six
volumes, however, included only the plays contained in the first and
second Folios. The poems, with an _Essay on the Rise and Progress of the
Stage_, and a Glossary, were contained in a seventh volume edited by Dr
Sewell.

Pope, unlike his predecessor, had at least seen the first Folio and some
of the Quartos of separate plays, and from the following passage of his
preface it might have been inferred that he had diligently collated them
all:

'This is the state in which Shakespeare's writings be at present; for
since the above-mentioned folio edition [_i.e._ F4], all the rest have
implicitly followed it without having recourse to any of the former, or
ever making the comparison between them. It is impossible to repair the
injuries already done him; too much time has elaps'd, and the materials
are too few. In what I have done I have rather given a proof of my
willingness and desire, than of my ability, to do him justice. I have
discharg'd the dull duty of an editor, to my best judgment, with more
labour than I expect thanks, with a religious abhorrence of all
innovation, and without any indulgence to my private sense or
conjecture. The method taken in this edition will show itself. The
various readings are fairly put in the margin, so that every one may
compare 'em, and those I prefer'd into the text are constantly _ex fide
codicum_, upon authority.'

This passage, as any one may see who examines the text, is much more
like a description of what the editor did _not_ do than of what he did.
Although in many instances he restored, from some Quarto, passages which
had been omitted in the Folio, it is very rarely indeed that we find any
evidence of his having collated either the first Folio or any Quarto,
with proper care. The 'innovations' which he made, according to his own
'private sense and conjecture,' are extremely numerous. Not one in
twenty of the various readings is put in the margin, and the readings in
his text very frequently rest upon no authority whatever. The glaring
inconsistency between the promise in the preface and the performance in
the book may well account for its failure with the public.

It would, however, be ungrateful not to acknowledge that Pope's
emendations are always ingenious and plausible, and sometimes
unquestionably true. He never seems to nod over that 'dull labour' of
which he complains. His acuteness of perception is never at fault.

What is said of him in the preface to Theobald's edition is, in this
point, very unjust[6].

'They have both (_i.e._ Pope and Rymer[7]) shown themselves in an equal
_impuissance_ of suspecting or amending the corrupted passages, &c.'

Pope was the first to indicate the _place_ of each new scene; as, for
instance, _Tempest_, I. 1. 'On a ship at sea.' He also subdivided the
scenes as given by the Folios and Rowe, making a fresh scene whenever a
new character entered--an arrangement followed by Hanmer, Warburton, and
Johnson. For convenience of reference to these editions, we have always
recorded the commencement of Pope's scenes.

By a minute comparison of the two texts we find that Pope printed his
edition from Rowe, not from any of the Folios.

A second edition, 10 volumes, 12mo, was published in 1728, 'by Mr Pope
and Dr Sewell.' In this edition, after Pope's preface, reprinted, comes:
'A table of the several editions of Shakespeare's plays, made use of and
compared in this impression.' Then follows a list containing the first
and second Folios, and twenty-eight Quarto editions of separate plays.
It does not, however, appear that even the first Folio was compared with
any care, for the changes made in this second edition are very few.

Lewis Theobald had the misfortune to incur the enmity of one who was
both the most popular poet, and, if not the first, at least the second,
satirist of his time. The main cause of offence was Theobald's
_Shakespeare Restored, or a Specimen of the many Errors committed as
well as unamended by Mr Pope in his late edition of this Poet_, 1726.
Theobald was also in the habit of communicating notes on passages of
Shakespeare to _Mist's Journal_, a weekly Tory paper. Hence he was made
the hero of the _Dunciad_ till dethroned in the fourth edition to make
way for Cibber; hence, too, the allusions in that poem:

  'There hapless Shakespear, yet of Theobald sore,
  Wish'd he had blotted for himself before;'

and, in the earlier editions,

  'Here studious I unlucky moderns save,
  Nor sleeps one error in its father's grave;
  Old puns restore, lost blunders nicely seek,
  And crucify poor Shakespear once a week.'

Pope's editors and commentators, adopting their author's quarrel, have
spoken of Theobald as 'Tibbald, a cold, plodding, and tasteless writer
and critic.' These are Warton's words. A more unjust sentence was never
penned. Theobald, as an Editor, is incomparably superior to his
predecessors, and to his immediate successor, Warburton, although the
latter had the advantage of working on his materials. He was the first
to recal a multitude of readings of the first Folio unquestionably
right, but unnoticed by previous editors. Many most brilliant
emendations, such as could not have suggested themselves to a mere
'cold, plodding, and tasteless critic,' are due to him. If he sometimes
erred--'humanum est.' It is remarkable that with all his minute
diligence[8], (which even his enemies conceded to him, or rather of
which they accused him) he left a goodly number of genuine readings from
the first Folio to be gleaned by the still more minutely diligent
Capell. It is to be regretted that he gave up numbering the scenes,
which makes his edition difficult to refer to. It was first published in
1733, in seven volumes, 8vo. A second, 8 volumes, 12mo, appeared in
1740.

In 1744, a new edition of Shakespeare's Works, in six volumes, 4to, was
published at Oxford. It appeared with a kind of sanction from the
University, as it was printed at the Theatre, with the Imprimatur of the
Vice-Chancellor, and had no publisher's name on the title-page. The
Editor is not named--hence he is frequently referred to by subsequent
critics as 'the Oxford Editor';--but as he was well known to be Sir
Thomas Hanmer, we have always referred to the book under his name. We
read in the preface: 'What the Publick is here to expect is a true and
correct Edition of Shakespear's Works, cleared from the corruptions with
which they have hitherto abounded. One of the great admirers of this
incomparable author hath made it the amusement of his leisure hours for
many years past to look over his writings with a careful eye, to note
the obscurities and absurdities introduced into the text, and according
to the best of his judgment to restore the genuine sense and purity of
it. In this he proposed nothing to himself but his private satisfaction
in making his own copy as perfect as he could; but as the emendations
multiplied upon his hands, other Gentlemen equally fond of the Author,
desired to see them, and some were so kind as to give their assistance
by communicating their observations and conjectures upon difficult
passages which had occurred to them.'

From this passage the character of the edition may be inferred.
A country gentleman of great ingenuity and lively fancy, but with no
knowledge of older literature, no taste for research, and no ear for the
rhythm of earlier English verse, amused his leisure hours by scribbling
down his own and his friends' guesses in Pope's Shakespeare, and with
this _apparatus criticus_, if we may believe Warburton, 'when that
illustrious body, the University of Oxford, in their public capacity,
undertook an edition of Shakespeare by subscription,' Sir T. Hanmer
'thrust himself into the employment.'

Whether from the sanction thus given, or from its typographical beauty,
or from the plausibility of its new readings, this edition continued in
favour, and even 'rose to the price of 10_l._ 10_s._ before it was
reprinted in 1770-1, while Pope's, in quarto, at the same period sold
off at Tonson's sale for 16_s._ per copy.' Bohn, p. 2260.

In 1747, three years after Pope's death, another edition of Shakespeare
based upon his appeared, edited by Mr Warburton.

On the title-page are these words: 'The Genuine Text (collated with all
the former Editions, and then corrected and emended) is here settled:
Being restored from the _Blunders_ of the first Editors, and the
_Interpolations_ of the two Last: with a Comment and Notes, Critical and
Explanatory. By Mr Pope and Mr Warburton[9].'

The latter, in his preface, vehemently attacks Theobald and Hanmer,
accusing both of plagiarism and even fraud. 'The one was recommended to
me as a poor Man, the other as a poor Critic: and to each of them, at
different times, I communicated a great number of Observations, which
they managed as they saw fit to the Relief of their several distresses.
As to Mr _Theobald_, who wanted Money, I allowed him to print what I
gave him for his own Advantage: and he allowed himself in the Liberty of
taking one Part for his own, and sequestering another for the Benefit,
as I supposed, of some future Edition. But as to the _Oxford Editor_,
who wanted nothing, but what he might very well be without, the
reputation of a Critic, I could not so easily forgive him for
trafficking in my Papers without my knowledge; and when that Project
fail'd, for employing a number of my Conjectures in his Edition against
my express Desire not to have that Honour done unto me.'

Again he says of Hanmer: 'Having a number of my Conjectures before him,
he took as many as he saw fit to work upon, and by changing them to
something, he thought, synonimous or similar, he made them his own,' &c.
&c. p. xii.

Of his own performance Warburton says, 'The Notes in this Edition take
in the whole Compass of Criticism. The first sort is employed in
restoring the Poet's genuine Text; but in those places only where it
labours with inextricable Nonsense. In which, how much soever I may have
given scope to critical Conjecture, when the old Copies failed me,
I have indulged nothing to Fancy or Imagination; but have religiously
observed the severe Canons of literal Criticism, &c. &c.' p. xiv. Yet
further on he says, 'These, such as they are, were amongst my younger
amusements, when, many years ago I used to turn over these sort of
Writers to unbend myself from more serious applications.'

The excellence of the edition proved to be by no means proportionate to
the arrogance of the editor. His text is, indeed, better than Pope's,
inasmuch as he introduced many of Theobald's restorations and some
probable emendations both of his own and of the two editors whom he so
unsparingly denounced, but there is no trace whatever, so far as we have
discovered, of his having collated for himself either the earlier Folios
or any of the Quartos.

Warburton[10] was, in his turn, severely criticised by Dr Zachary Grey,
and Mr John Upton, in 1746, and still more severely by Mr Thomas
Edwards, in his _Supplement to Mr Warburton's edition of Shakespeare_,
1747. The third edition of Mr Edwards's book, 1750, was called _Canons
of Criticism and Glossary, being a Supplement, &c._ This title is a
sarcastic allusion to two passages in Warburton's preface: 'I once
intended to have given the Reader a _body of Canons_, for literal
Criticism, drawn out in form,' &c. p. xiv, and 'I had it once, indeed,
in my design, to give a general alphabetic _Glossary_ of these terms,'
&c. p. xvi. Dr Grey's attack was reprinted, with additions, and a new
title, in 1751, and again in 1752. Warburton and his predecessors were
passed in review also by Mr Benjamin Heath, in _A Revisal of
Shakespeare's text_, 1765.

Dr Samuel Johnson first issued proposals for a new edition of
Shakespeare in 1745, but met with no encouragement. He resumed the
scheme in 1756, and issued a new set of Proposals (reprinted in Malone's
preface), 'in which,' says Boswell, 'he shewed that he perfectly well
knew what a variety of research such an undertaking required, but his
indolence prevented him from pursuing it with that diligence, which
alone can collect those scattered facts that genius, however acute,
penetrating, and luminous, cannot discover by its own force.' Johnson
deceived himself so far, as to the work to be done and his own energy in
doing it, that he promised the publication of the whole before the end
of the following year. Yet, though some volumes were printed as early as
1758 (Boswell, Vol. II. p. 84), it was not published till 1765, and
might never have been published at all, but for Churchill's stinging
satire:

  'He for subscribers baits his hook,
  And takes your cash, but where's the book?
  No matter where; wise fear, you know,
  Forbids the robbing of a foe,
  But what, to serve our private ends,
  Forbids the cheating of our friends?'

Not only Johnson's constitutional indolence and desultory habits, but
also the deficiency of his eye-sight, incapacitated him for the task of
minute collation. Nevertheless, he did consult the older copies, and has
the merit of restoring some readings which had escaped Theobald. He had
not systematically studied the literature and language of the 16th and
17th centuries; he did not always appreciate the naturalness,
simplicity, and humour of his author, but his preface and notes are
distinguished by clearness of thought and diction and by masterly common
sense. He used Warburton's text, to print his own from. The readings and
suggestions attributed to 'Johnson,' in our notes, are derived either
from the edition of 1765, or from those which he furnished to the
subsequent editions in which Steevens was his co-editor. Some few also
found by the latter in Johnson's hand on the margin of his copy of
'Warburton,' purchased by Steevens at Johnson's sale, were incorporated
in later editions. Johnson's edition was attacked with great acrimony by
Dr Kenrick, 1765 (Boswell, Vol. II. p. 300). It disappointed the public
expectation, but reached, nevertheless, a second edition in 1768.
Tyrwhitt's _Observations and Conjectures_ were published anonymously in
1766.

Capell's edition (10 volumes, small 8vo) was not published till 1768,
though part of it had gone to press, as the editor himself tells us, in
September, 1760. It contained the Plays in the order of the first and
second Folios, with a preface, of which Dr Johnson said, referring to
_Tempest_, I. 2. 356, 'The fellow should have come to me, and I would
have endowed his purpose with words. As it is he doth gabble
monstrously.'

Defects of style apart, this preface was by far the most valuable
contribution to Shakespearian criticism that had yet appeared, and the
text was based upon a most searching collation of all the Folios and of
all the Quartos known to exist at that time. Capell's own conjectures,
not always very happy, which he has introduced into his text, are
distinguished by being printed in black letter.

The edition before us contains the scansion of the lines, with
occasional verbal as well as metrical corrections, marked in red ink, in
Capell's hand. This was done, as he tells us in a note prefixed to Vol.
I., in 1769.

He described, much more minutely than Pope had done, the places of the
scenes, and made many changes, generally for the better, in the stage
directions.

In his peculiar notation, _Asides_ are marked by inverted commas, and
obvious stage business is indicated by an obelus.

In a note to his preface, p. xxiii, Capell says:

'In the manuscripts from which all these plays are printed, the
emendations are given to their proper owners by initials and other marks
that are in the margin of those manuscripts; but they are suppressed in
the print for two reasons: First their number, in some pages, makes them
a little unsightly; and the editor professes himself weak enough to like
a well-printed book; in the next place, he does declare, that his only
object has been to do service to his Author; which provided it be done,
he thinks it of small importance by what hand the service was
administer'd,' &c.

By this unfortunate decision, Capell deprived his book of almost all its
interest and value[11]. And thus his unequalled zeal and industry have
never received from the public the recognition they deserved.

In 1774, a volume of notes[12] was printed in quarto, and in 1783, two
years after his death, appeared _Notes, Various Readings, and the School
of Shakespeare_, 3 vols. 4to.[13] The printing of this work was begun in
1779.

George Steevens, who had edited in 1766 a reprint of Twenty of the Plays
of Shakespeare from the Quartos, at a time, when, as he himself
afterwards said, he was 'young and uninformed,' and had been in the
meanwhile one of Johnson's most active and useful correspondents, was
formally associated with him as Editor in 1770 (Boswell, Vol. III.
p. 116). At Steevens's suggestion, Johnson wrote to Dr Farmer of
Emmanuel College, Cambridge, requesting him to furnish a Catalogue of
all the Translations Shakespeare might have seen and used. Hence, it
seems, Farmer took an interest in the successive editions, and supplied
many valuable notes and acute conjectural readings. It was on Farmer's
authority that _Pericles_ has been re-admitted among the Plays of
Shakespeare.

The first edition of Johnson and Steevens appeared in 1773. The
improvements in this edition, as compared with those which bore
Johnson's name only, are evidently the work of the new editor, who
brought to the task diligent and methodical habits and great antiquarian
knowledge, thus supplementing the defects of his senior partner.
J. Collins, editor of Capell's _Notes_ &c. charged Steevens with
plagiarism from Capell. Steevens denied the charge. The second edition
came out in 1778; the third in 1785; and the fourth in 1793. In this
edition Steevens made many changes in the text, as if for the purpose of
differing from the cautious Malone, now become a rival.

Edmond Malone contributed to Steevens his _Attempt to ascertain the
order in which the plays attributed to Shakespeare were written_; in
1780, published a _Supplement_ to the edition of 1778, containing the
Poems, the seven plays from F3, notes, &c., and moreover distinguished
himself by various researches into the history and literature of the
early English stage. He published in 1790 a new edition of Shakespeare
in 10 volumes, 8vo, containing the Plays and Poems, 'collated verbatim
with the most authentic copies, and revised,' together with several
essay and dissertations, among the rest that on the order of the plays,
corrected and enlarged.

The animosities which both Steevens and Malone had the misfortune to
excite, have had the effect of throwing some slur on their names as
editors, and even as men, and have prevented the fair appreciation and a
due acknowledgment of the services they rendered jointly and severally
to English literature.

The learning and ability displayed by Malone in denouncing Ireland's
most clumsy and palpable of frauds, would have sufficed for the
detection of the most cunningly conceived and skilfully executed.

Among the critics of this time may be mentioned (1) Joseph Ritson, who
published in 1783 his _Remarks, &c._ on the second edition of Johnson
and Steevens, and in 1788, _The Quip Modest_, on the third edition, and
(2) John Monck Mason, whose _Comments_ appeared in 1785, and _Further
Observations_ in 1798.


In 1803 appeared an edition in 21 volumes 8vo, edited by Isaac Reed.
This is called on the title-page 'the Fifth Edition,' _i.e._ of Johnson
and Steevens. It is generally known as the first _variorum_ edition.
Chalmers's edition, 9 vols. 8vo, 1805, professes to be printed from the
corrected text left by Steevens. The 'sixth edition' of Johnson and
Steevens, or the second _variorum_, appeared in 1813, also edited by
Reed; the 'seventh,' or third _variorum_, in 1821, edited by James
Boswell, from a corrected copy left by Malone.

Among those whose notes were communicated to or collected by various
editors from Johnson to Boswell, the best known names are the following:
Sir William Blackstone, Dr Burney, Bennet Langton, Collins the poet, Sir
J. Hawkins, Musgrave, the editor of _Euripides_, Dr Percy, editor of the
_Reliques_, and Thomas Warton. Less known names are: Blakeway,
J. Collins, Henley, Holt White, Letherland, Roberts, Seward, Smith,
Thirlby, Tollet, and Whalley[14].

Harness's edition, 8 volumes, 8vo, appeared in 1825.

Of the comments published separately during the present century the
principal are:

1. _Remarks, &c._, by E. H. Seymour, 2 vols, 8vo, 1805, in which are
incorporated some notes left by Lord Chedworth.

2. _Shakspeare's himself again_, by Andrew Becket, 2 vols, 8vo. 1815.
The author has indulged in a license of conjecture and of interpretation
which has never been equalled before or since. We have nevertheless
generally given his conjectures, except when he has gone the length of
inventing a word.

3. _Shakspeare's Genius Justified_, by Zachary Jackson, 1 vol. 8vo,
1811. As the author himself had been a printer, his judgement on the
comparative likelihood of this and that typographical error is worth all
consideration. But he sometimes wanders 'ultra crepidam[15].'

Douce's _Illustrations to Shakespeare_, 2 vols. 8vo, 1807, ought to be
mentioned as a work of great antiquarian research, though he rarely
suggests any new alteration of the text, and his name therefore will
seldom occur in our notes.


The more recent editions of Shakespeare are so well known and so easily
accessible, that it is unnecessary for us, even were it becoming in this
place, to undertake the invidious task of comparing their respective
merits.

It will suffice to mention the names of the editors in the order of
their first editions: S. W. Singer, Charles Knight, Barry Cornwall,
J. Payne Collier, S. Phelps, J. O. Halliwell, Alex. Dyce, Howard
Staunton.

We have also to mention the edition of Delius, 7 vols. 8vo, Elberfeld,
1854-61, the English text, with concise notes, critical and explanatory,
in German, and that of Mr Richard Grant White (known as the author of
_Shakespeare's Scholar_, 1854), published at Boston, United States,
1857.

In 1853, Mr J. Payne Collier, published in 1 vol. 8vo, _Notes and
Emendations to the text of Shakespeare's Plays, from early manuscript
corrections, in a copy of the Folio 1632_, in his own possession. All
the emendations given in this volume by Mr Collier, or subsequently as
an Appendix to Coleridge's _Lectures_, except, of course, where they
have been anticipated, have been recorded in our notes.

We have no intention of entering into the controversy respecting the
antiquity and authority of these corrections, nor is it necessary to
enumerate the writings on a subject which is still so fresh in the
memory of all.

M. Tycho Mommsen, of Marburg, who published the most elaborate work on
the so-called 'Perkins Folio,' also published in 1859 the text of the
first Quartos of _Romeo and Juliet_, with a collation of the various
readings of all editions down to Rowe's, a full description of the
critical value of the different texts, and an inquiry into the
versification, and incidentally the grammar and orthography of
Shakespeare. The precise rules which he lays down disappear, for the
most part, on a wider induction, and we greatly question whether it be
worth while to register and tabulate such minutiæ as do not represent in
any way Shakespeare's mind or hand, but only the caprices of this or
that compositor, at a period when spelling, punctuation, and even rules
of grammar, were matters of private judgement.

But M. Mommsen's industry is beyond praise, and his practice of using
the labours of English Editors, without insulting them, is worthy of all
imitation[16].

Among the works to which reference will be found in our edition are the
following:

Coleridge's _Literary Remains_: Dr Guest's _History of English Rhythms_:
_the Versification of Shakespeare_, by W. Sidney Walker, (1854), and
_Criticisms_, by the same, 3 vols., post 8vo, (1860), edited by Mr
Lettsom, who has also contributed in his notes some suggestions for the
improvement of the text. It is to be regretted that these volumes have
not been accompanied by an Index. Dr. Charles Badham's article in the
_Cambridge Essays_, 1856, contains many ingenious suggestions.

We have borrowed from several literary journals, the _Athenæum_, _Notes
and Queries_, and the _Parthenon_, and from Magazines, the conjectures
of their correspondents. When the real name of the correspondent, or
what might be such, was signed, we have given it in our notes, as
'Hickson,' 'S. Verges' (from _Notes and Queries_). When the name was
obviously fictitious, or when the article was not signed at all, we have
noted it thus: 'Anon. (N. and Q.) conj.,' 'Anon. (Fras. Mag.) conj.,'
&c., referring to _Notes and Queries_, _Fraser's Magazine_, &c.

'Spedding,' 'Bullock,' 'Lloyd,' 'Williams,' 'Wright,' indicate
respectively our correspondents, Mr James Spedding, Mr John Bullock, of
Aberdeen, the Rev. Julius Lloyd, Mr W. W. Williams, of Oxford, and Mr
W. Aldis Wright, to each and all of whom we beg to return our best
thanks. We have also to thank Mr Archibald Smith, Mr C. W. Goodwin, Mr
Bolton Corney, Mr N. E. S. A. Hamilton, Mr J. Nichols, Mr Jourdain, Dr
Brinsley Nicholson, Mr Halliwell, Dr Barlow, Mr Grant White, Mr B. H.
Bright, Mr Henry A. Bright, and Mr Bohn, for friendly suggestions and
kind offers of assistance.

The proposed emendations, marked 'Anon. conj.' are those which we have
not been able to trace, or those in which the authors have not
sufficient confidence to acknowledge them.

Those proposed with some confidence by the present editors are marked
'Edd. conj.'


In conclusion, we commend this volume, the first product of long labour,
to the indulgent judgement of critics. In saying this we are not merely
repeating a stereotyped phrase. We have found errors in the work of the
most accurate of our predecessors. We cannot hope to have attained
perfect accuracy ourselves, especially when we consider the wide range
which our collation has embraced, and the minute points which we have
endeavoured to record, but at all events we have spared no pains to
render our work as exact as we could. Those who have ever undertaken a
similar task will best understand the difficulty, and will be most ready
to make allowance for shortcomings. 'Expertus disces quam gravis iste
labor.'

W. G. C.

J. G.




The five plays contained in this volume occur in the first Folio in the
same order, and, with one exception, were there printed for the first
time.

In the case of _The Merry Wives of Windsor_, two Quartos (Q1 and Q2),
imperfect copies of an earlier play, appeared in 1602 and 1619, the
second a reprint of the first. They are described in a special
Introduction to that play, and a reprint of Q1, collated with Q2,
follows it. A third Quarto (Q3) was printed from F1 in 1630.

_The Tempest_ was altered by Dryden and D'Avenant, and published as _The
Tempest; or the Enchanted Island_, in 1669. We mark the emendations
derived from it: 'Dryden's version.' D'Avenant, in his _Law against
Lovers_ fused _Measure for Measure_ and _Much ado about Nothing_ into
one play. We refer to his new readings as being from 'D'Avenant's
version.'


    [Footnote 1: A third editor was afterwards added. Mr Luard's
    election to the office of Registrary compelled him to relinquish
    his part, at least for the present; and the first volume,
    consequently, is issued under the responsibility of two editors
    only.]

    [Footnote 2: See page xxi.]

    [Footnote 3: A passage in the _Return from Parnassus_ compared
    with one in Bale's preface to his _Image of Both Churches_ puts
    this almost beyond a doubt.]

    [Footnote 4: Mr Wright in his preface to _Bacon's Essays_ mentions
    that he has collated ten copies of the edition of 1625, 'which
    though bearing the same date, are all different from each other in
    points of no great importance.']

    [Footnote 5: Mr Bohn is mistaken in saying that the Capell copy
    has both titles. It has that of 1664 only, with the portrait, and
    B. J.'s verses underneath on the opposite page.]

    [Footnote 6: Capell's copy now before us contains the following
    note in Capell's hand-writing: 'This copy of Mr Theobald's
    edition was once Mr Warburton's; who has claim'd in it the notes
    he gave to the former which that former depriv'd him of and made
    his own, and some Passages in the Preface, the passages being put
    between hooks and the notes signed with his name. E. C.' The
    passage quoted from Theobald's Preface is one of those between
    hooks.]

    [Footnote 7: Thomas Rymer, whose book, called _A short View of
    Tragedy of the last Age_, 1693, gave rise to a sharp controversy.]

    [Footnote 8: Capell, who might be supposed to write 'sine ira et
    studio,' denies to Theobald even this merit: 'His work is only
    made a little better [than Pope's] by his having a few more
    materials; of which he was not a better collator than the other,
    nor did he excel him in use of them.' The result of the collations
    we have made leads us to a very different conclusion.]

    [Footnote 9: Notwithstanding this claim of identity, Warburton
    seems to have used Theobald's text to print from. Capell
    positively affirms this, (Preface, p. 18).]

    [Footnote 10: Dr Johnson told Burney that Warburton, as a critic,
    'would make two-and-fifty Theobalds cut into slices.' (Boswell's
    _Life of Johnson_, Vol. ii. p. 85. Ed. 1835). From this judgment,
    whether they be compared as critics or editors, we emphatically
    dissent.]

    [Footnote 11: We trust that in our edition the matter which Capell
    discarded has been presented in a well-printed book. We have found
    no trace of the Manuscripts here spoken of.]

    [Footnote 12: In Lowndes's _Manual_ (Bohm), p. 2316, we find
    'Notes and Various Readings to Shakespeare. By Edward Capell,
    Lond. 1759.' No such book of this date is in the Capell
    collection, nor is it ever mentioned elsewhere, so far as we know.
    In the preface to the work of 1783, it is mentioned that the first
    volume had been printed in 1774, but no allusion is made to any
    former edition.]

    [Footnote 13: These volumes, together with the whole of
    Shakespeare's _Plays_ and Milton's _Paradise Lost_, written out in
    Capell's own regular, but not very legible hand, are among his
    collection in Trinity College Library.]

    [Footnote 14: Steevens was accused of giving, under fictitious
    names, notes which he was afraid to sign himself.]

    [Footnote 15: The two last-named books, as well as some
    suggestions from correspondents, did not reach us till the first
    Volume was partly printed. We propose to supply all omissions in
    an Appendix to the whole work.]

    [Footnote 16: Aber man läuft ein gefährliches Spiel, wenn man
    nicht überall offen und bescheiden bekennt, dass man ganz von den
    Engländern abhange: ja man scheitert gewiss, wenn man mit der
    einen Hand allen Stoff von dem man lebt und athmet ihnen entnimmt,
    und mit der andern zum Dank Hohn und Beleidigung auf ihren Namen
    wirft. _Vorrede_, pp. vi. vii.]


Erratum Noted by Transcriber

  'stolen,' 'surreptitious,' and 'imperfect,'
    ["surreptitious" missing open quote]


       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *
       *       *       *       *       *


  MACMILLAN & CO.'S
  LIST OF
  NEW AND POPULAR WORKS.


  SECOND EDITION.
  RAVENSHOE.
  By HENRY KINGSLEY, Author of 'Geoffry Hamlyn.'

3 Vols. crown 8vo. cloth, £1 11s. 6d.

'Admirable descriptions, which place "Ravenshoe" almost in the first
rank of novels. Of the story itself it would really be difficult to
speak too highly. The author stems to possess every essential for a
writer of fiction.' --LONDON REVIEW.


  SECOND EDITION.
  RECOLLECTIONS OF GEOFFRY HAMLYN.
  By HENRY KINGSLEY. Crown 8vo. cloth, 6s.

'Mr. Henry Kingsley has written a work that keeps up its interest from
the first page to the last--it is full of vigorous stirring life. The
descriptions of Australian life in the early colonial days are marked by
an unmistakable touch of reality and personal experience. A book which
the public will be more inclined to read than to criticise, and we
commend, them to each other.' --ATHENÆUM.


  SECOND EDITION.
  TOM BROWN AT OXFORD.
  3 Vols. £1 11s. 6d.

'A book that will live. In no other work that we can call to mind are
the finer qualities of the English gentleman more happily portrayed.'
--DAILY NEWS.

'The extracts we have given can give no adequate expression to the
literary vividness and noble ethical atmosphere which pervade the whole
book.' --SPECTATOR.


  TWENTY-EIGHTH THOUSAND.
  TOM BROWN'S SCHOOL DAYS.
  By AN OLD BOY. Fcp. 8vo. 5s.

'A book which every father might well wish to see in the hands of his
son.' --TIMES.


  EIGHTH THOUSAND.
  SCOURING OF THE WHITE HORSE.
  By the Author of 'Tom's Brown's School Days.'

With numerous Illustrations by Richard Doyle. Imperial 16mo. Printed on
toned paper, gilt leaves, 8s. 6d.

'The execution is excellent.... Like "Tom Brown's School Days," the
"White Horse" gives the reader a feeling of gratitude and personal
esteem towards the author. The author could not have a better style, nor
a better temper, nor a more excellent artist than Mr. Doyle to adorn his
book.' --SATURDAY REVIEW.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

WORKS BY THE REV. CHARLES KINGSLEY.

Chaplain in Ordinary to the Queen, Rector of Eversley,
and Professor of Modern History in the University of Cambridge.


  HYPATIA.
  NEW EDITION. Crown 8vo. cloth, 6s.


  WESTWARD HO!
  NEW AND CHEAPER EDITION. Crown 8vo. cloth, 6s.


  TWO YEARS AGO.
  NEW AND CHEAPER EDITION. Crown 8vo. cloth, 6s.


  ALTON LOCKE, TAILOR AND POET.
  NEW EDITION. Crown 8vo, cloth, 4s. 6d. With New Preface.

[-->] This Edition is printed in crown 8vo. uniform with 'Westward Ho!'
&c., and contains New Preface.


  THE HEROES.
  GREEK FAIRY TALES FOR THE YOUNG.

SECOND EDITION, with Illustrations. Royal 16mo. cloth, 3s. 6d.


  ALEXANDRIA AND HER SCHOOLS.
  Crown 8vo. cloth, 5s.


  THE LIMITS OF EXACT SCIENCE AS APPLIED TO HISTORY.
  INAUGURAL LECTURE AT CAMBRIDGE. Crown 8vo. 2s.


  PHAETHON:
  LOOSE THOUGHTS FOR LOOSE THINKERS.

THIRD EDITION. Crown 8vo. 2s.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

NEW AND CHEAPER EDITION (SIXTH THOUSAND).

Handsomely printed on toned paper and bound in extra cloth. With
Vignette and Frontispiece from Designs by the author. Engraved on Steel
by C. H. Jeens. 4s. 6d.

  THE LADY OF LA GARAYE.

By the Hon. Mrs. NORTON. Dedicated to the Marquis of Lansdowne.

'The poem is a pure, tender, touching tale of pain, sorrow, love, duty,
piety, and death.' --EDINBURGH REVIEW.

'A true poem, noble in subject and aim, natural in flow, worthy in
expression, with the common soul of humanity throbbing in every page
through wholesome words.' --EXAMINER.


  GOBLIN MARKET AND OTHER POEMS.
  By CHRISTINA G. ROSSETTI. With Two Illustrations from Designs by
  D. G. Rossetti. Fcp. 8vo. cloth, 5s.


  BEHIND THE VEIL AND OTHER POEMS.
  By the Hon. RODEN NOEL. Fcp. 8vo. cloth.


  LEAVES FROM OUR CYPRESS AND OUR OAK.
  Handsomely printed on toned paper, gilt cloth.


  SECOND EDITION.
  EDWIN OF DEIRA.
  By ALEXANDER SMITH. Fcp. 8vo. cloth, 5s.


  BY THE SAME AUTHOR.
  A LIFE DRAMA AND OTHER POEMS.
  4th Edition, 2s. 6d.


  CITY POEMS.
  Price 5s.


  BLANCHE LISLE AND OTHER POEMS.
  By CECIL HOME. Fcp. 8vo. cloth, 4s. 6d.

'The writer has music and meaning in his lines and stanzas, which, in
the selection of diction and gracefulness of cadence, have seldom been
excelled.' --LEADER.

'Full of a true poet's imagination.' --JOHN BULL.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

THE POEMS OF ARTHUR HUGH CLOUGH,

Sometime Fellow of Oriel College, Oxford.

With a Memoir by F. T. PALGRAVE. Fcp. 8vo. cloth, 6s.

'Few, if any, literary men of larger, deeper, and more massive mind have
lived in this generation than the author of these few poems, and of this
the volume before us bears ample evidence ... There is nothing in it
that is not in some sense rich either in thought or beauty, or both.'
--SPECTATOR.


Uniform with 'WESTWARD HO!' 'GEOFFRY HAMLYN,' &c.

  THE MOOR COTTAGE:
  A TALE OF HOME LIFE.

By MAY BEVERLEY, author of 'Little Estella, and other Fairy Tales for
the Young.' Crown 8vo. cloth, price 6s.

'This charming tale is told with such excellent art, that it reads like
an episode from real life.' --ATLAS.

'The whole plot of the story is conceived and executed in an admirable
manner: a work which, when once taken up, it is difficult to put down.'
--JOHN BULL.


Uniform with 'WESTWARD HO!' 'GEOFFRY HAMLYN,' &c.

  ARTIST AND CRAFTSMAN.
  Crown 8vo. cloth, price 6s.

'Its power is unquestionable, its felicity of expression great, its plot
fresh, and its character very natural ... Wherever read, it will be
enthusiastically admired and cherished.' --MORNING HERALD.


Uniform with 'WESTWARD HO!' 'GEOFFRY HAMLYN,' &c.

  A LADY IN HER OWN RIGHT.
  By WESTLAND MARSTON. Crown 8vo. cloth, price 6s.

'Since "The Mill on the Floss" was noticed, we have read no work of
fiction which we can so heartily recommend to our readers as "A Lady in
her Own Right:" the plot, incidents, and characters are all good: the
style is simple and graceful: it abounds in thoughts judiciously
introduced and well expressed, and throughout a kind, liberal, and
gentle spirit.' --CHURCH OF ENGLAND MONTHLY REVIEW.


  THE BROKEN TROTH:
  A TALE OF TUSCAN LIFE FROM THE ITALIAN.

By PHILIP IRETON. 2 vols. fcp. 8vo. cloth, 12s.

'The style is so easy and natural ... The story is well told from
beginning to end.' --PRESS.

'A genuine Italian tale--a true picture of the Tuscan peasant
population, with all their virtues, faults, weaknesses, follies, and
even vices ... The best Italian tale that has been published since the
appearance of the 'Promessi Sposi' of Manzoni ... The 'Broken Troth' is
one of those that cannot be read but with pleasure.' --LONDON REVIEW.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

  THE GREAT STONE BOOK.
  By D. T. ANSTED, M.A., F.R.S.,
    late Fellow of Jesus College, Cambridge.
  With Illustrations. Fcp. 8vo. cloth, 5s.


  FOOTNOTES FROM THE PAGE OF NATURE:
  OR, FIRST FORMS OF VEGETATION

A popular work on Algæ, Fungi, Mosses, and Lichens.

By the Rev. HUGH MACMILLAN, F.R.S.E. With numerous Illustrations and a
Coloured Frontispiece. Fcp. 8vo. 5s.


Reduced In Price To Five Shillings.

  GLAUCUS; OR, WONDERS OF THE SEA SHORE.

By CHARLES KINGSLEY, M.A. Rector of Eversley, and Chaplain in Ordinary
to the Queen. Containing beautifully Coloured Illustrations of the
Objects mentioned in the work. Royal 16mo. elegantly bound in cloth,
gilt leaves, 5s.


  STRAY NOTES ON FISHING AND NATURAL HISTORY.
  By CORNWALL SIMEON. With Illustrations, 7s. 6d.


  THE HUMAN HAND AND THE HUMAN FOOT.

By G. M. HUMPHRY, M.D. F.R.S., Lecturer on Surgery and Anatomy in the
University of Cambridge.

With numerous Illustrations. Fcp. 8vo. cloth, 4s. 6d.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

  TYPICAL FORMS AND SPECIAL ENDS IN CREATION.

By JAMES McCOSH, LL.D., and GEORGE DICKIE, M.D., Professor in the
Queen's University, Ireland.

SECOND EDITION. Crown 8vo. with Illustrations, 6s.


  THE STORY OF A BOULDER;
  OR, GLEANINGS BY A FIELD GEOLOGIST.

By ARCHIBALD GEIKIE. Illustrated. Fcp. 8vo. cloth, 6s.

'We do not know a more readable book on a scientific subject, and it
will be invaluable to young people, as well as interesting to those who
are already acquainted with the subject it treats of.' --CLERICAL
JOURNAL.


  LIFE AND CORRESPONDENCE OF M. DE TOCQUEVILLE.

Translated from the French. By the Translator of 'Napoleon
Correspondence with King Joseph.' With numerous additions. 2 vols. crown
8vo. 21s.

'The appearance of this work will be welcomed by every politician and
every Englishman capable of appreciating exhaustive and solid thought.'
--SPECTATOR.

'Few men of the nineteenth century have attained a more remarkable
influence.... Charming as specimens of style, they are of infinitely
greater value as showing the inner life of a man who was as simple as a
child, and yet as gifted as any of the many learned writers and scholars
whom France has produced.' --BELL'S MESSENGER.


  PICTURES OF OLD ENGLAND.

By Dr. REINHOLD PAULI. Translated, with the author's revision, by E. C.
OTTÉ. With a Map of London in the Thirteenth Century.

Crown 8vo. extra cloth, 8s. 6d.

CONTENTS:

     I. Canterbury and the Worship of St. Thomas à Becket.
    II. Monks and Mendicant Friars.
   III. Parliament in the Fourteenth Century.
    IV. England's Earliest Relations to Austria and Prussia.
     V. The Emperor Louis IV. and King Edward III.
    VI. The Hanseatic Steel Yard in London.
   VII. Two Poets, Gower and Chaucer.
  VIII. John Wiclif.

'There are some books so admirable, that merely general criticism
subsides into "_Read, it will satisfy you._" Dr. Pauli's work is of this
kind.' --NONCONFORMIST.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

  GARIBALDI AT CAPRERA.
  By COLONEL VECCHJ.
    With Preface by Mrs. Gaskell, and a View of Caprera.

Fcp. 8vo. cloth, 3s. Cd.

'After all has been told, there was something wanting to the full and
true impression of the Patriot's character and mode of life; as every
one who reads this artless and enthusiastic narration will certainly
admit. Mrs. GASKELL says she knows that "every particular" of this full
and minute account may be relied upon; and it has an air of truth that
commends it even when it is most extravagant in its admiration.'
--NONCONFORMIST.


  ROME IN 1860.
  By EDWARD DICEY, author of 'Life of Cavour.' Crown 8vo. cloth, 6s. 6d.

'So striking and apparently so faithful a portrait. It is the Rome of
real life he has depicted.' --SPECTATOR.


  THE ITALIAN WAR OF 1848-9,

And the last Italian Poet. By the late HENRY LUSHINGTON, Chief Secretary
to the Government of Malta. With a Biographical Preface by G. STOVIN
VENABLES. Crown 8vo. cloth, 6s. 6d.

'Perhaps the most difficult of all literary tasks--the task of giving
historical unity, dignity, and interest to events so recent as to be
still encumbered with all the details with which newspapers invest
them--has never been more successfully discharged ... Mr. Lushington, in
a very short compass, shows the true nature and sequence of the event,
and gives to the whole story of the struggle and defeat of Italy a
decree of unity and dramatic interest which not one newspaper reader in
ten thousand ever supposed it to possess.' --SATURDAY REVIEW.


  EARLY EGYPTIAN HISTORY.
  FOR THE YOUNG,
  WITH DESCRIPTIONS OF THE TOMBS AND MONUMENTS.

By the Author of 'Sidney Grey,' &c. and her Sister.

SECOND EDITION. With Frontispiece. Fcp. 8vo. cloth, 5s.

'Full of information without being dull, and full of humour without
being frivolous; stating in the most popular form the main results of
modern research.... We have said enough to take our readers to the book
itself, where they will learn more of Ancient Egypt than in any other
popular work on the subject.' --LONDON REVIEW.


SECOND EDITION.

  GEORGE BRIMLEY'S ESSAYS.

Edited by WILLIAM GEORGE CLARK. M.A. Public Orator in the University of
Cambridge. With Portrait. Crown 8vo. cloth, 5s.

CONTENTS:--I. Tennyson's Poems; II. Wordsworth's Poems; III. Poetry and
Criticism; IV. Angel in the House; V. Carlyle's Life of Sterling;
VI. Esmond; VII. My Novel; VIII. Bleak House; IX. Westward Ho!
X. Wilson's Noctes; XI. Comte's Positive Philosophy.

'One of the most delightful and precious volumes of criticism that has
appeared in these days ... To every cultivated reader they will disclose
the wonderful clearness of perception, the delicacy of feeling, the pure
taste, and the remarkably firm and decisive judgment which are the
characteristics of all Mr. Brimley's writings on subjects that really
penetrated and fully possessed his nature.' --NONCONFORMIST.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

BOOKS FOR THE YOUNG.

A SERIES OF WORKS (uniformly printed and bound) by Professor KINGSLEY,
the Author of 'John Halifax. Gentleman,' Mrs. OLIPHANT, and other
Popular Writers. Handsomely printed in royal 16mo. extra gilt cloth,
gilt leaves, at 3s. 6d. each.

  DAYS OF OLD:

Stories from Old English History. By the Author of 'Ruth and Her
Friends.'

With Frontispiece.


  THE HEROES:

Greek Fairy Tales for the Young. By CHARLES KINGSLEY, M.A., Vicar of
Eversley, and Chaplain in Ordinary to the Queen.

SECOND EDITION. With Illustrations.


  DAVID, KING OF ISRAEL:

A History for the Young. By JOSIAH WRIGHT, Head Master of Sutton
Coldfield Grammar School. With Illustrations.

'An excellent book ... well conceived, and well worked out.'
--LITERARY CHURCHMAN.


  RUTH AND HER FRIENDS:

A Story for Girls. THIRD EDITION. With Frontispiece.

'A book which girls will read with avidity, and cannot fail to profit
by.' --LITERARY CHURCHMAN.


  OUR YEAR:

A Child's Book in Prose and Rhyme. By the Author of 'John Halifax.' With
numerous Illustrations by CLARENCE DOBELL.


  LITTLE ESTELLA
  And Other Fairy Tales.
  By MAY BEVERLEY. With Frontispiece.


  MY FIRST JOURNAL:
  A Book for Children. By GEORGIANA M. CRAIK, author of 'Lost and Won'.
  With Frontispiece.


  AGNES HOPETOUN'S SCHOOLS AND HOLIDAYS.
  By Mrs. OLIPHANT, Author of 'Margaret Maitland.' With Frontispiece.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

THE GOLDEN TREASURY SERIES.

Uniformly printed in 18mo. with Vignette Titles by T. Woolner, W. Holman
Hunt, &c. Handsomely bound in extra cloth, 4s. 6d.; morocco plain, 7s.
6d.; morocco extra, 10s. Cd. each volume.


  THE GOLDEN TREASURY

Of the best Songs and lyrical Poems in the English language. Selected
and arranged, with Notes, by F. T. Palgrave. Fifteenth Thousand, with a
Vignette by T. Woolner.

'There is no book in the English language which will make a more
delightful companion than this ... which must not only be read, but
possessed, in order to be adequately valued.' --SPECTATOR.


  THE CHILDREN'S GARLAND.

From the best Poets. Selected and arranged by Coventry Patmore. Fourth
Thousand, with Vignette by T. Woolner.

'Mr. Patmore deserves our gratitude for having searched through the wide
field of English poetry for these flowers, which youth and age can
equally enjoy, and woven them into "The Children's Garland."' --LONDON
REVIEW.


  THE PILGRIM'S PROGRESS.

By JOHN BUNYAN. With Vignette by W. Holman Hunt. Large-paper copies,
crown 8vo. cloth, 7s. 6d.; half morocco, 10s. 6d.

'A prettier and better edition, and one more exactly suited for use as
an elegant and inexpensive gift book, is not to be found.' --EXAMINER.


  THE BOOK OF PRAISE.

From the best English Hymn-writers. Selected and arranged by Roundell
Palmer. Eighth Thousand, with Vignette by T. Woolner.

'Comprehending nearly all that is excellent in the hymnology of the
language. ... In the details of editorial labours the most exquisite
finish is manifest.' --THE FREEMAN.


  BACON'S ESSAYS AND COLOURS OF GOOD AND EVIL.

With Notes and Glossarial Index, by W. Aldis Wright, M.A. Trinity
College, Cambridge. And a Vignette of Woolner's Statue of Lord Bacon.
Large-paper copies, crown 8vo. cloth, 7s. 6d.; half morocco, 10s. 6d.

Edited in a manner worthy of their merit and fame, as an English classic
ought to be edited.' --DAILY NEWS.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

WORKS BY DAVID MASSON, M.A.

Professor of English Literature in University College, London.


  LIFE OF JOHN MILTON.

Narrated in connexion with the Political, Ecclesiastical, and Literary
History of his time. Vol. 1. 8vo. with Portraits, 18s.

'Mr. Masson's Life of Milton has many sterling merits ... his industry
is immense: his zeal unflagging; his special knowledge of Milton's life
and times extraordinary.... With a zeal and industry which we cannot
sufficiently commend, he has not only availed himself of the
biographical stores collected by his predecessors, but imparted to them
an aspect of novelty by his skilful re-arrangement.' --EDINBURGH REVIEW.


  BRITISH NOVELISTS AND THEIR STYLES;

Being a critical sketch of the History of British Prose Fiction. Crown
8vo. cloth, 7s. 6d.

'A work eminently calculated to win popularity, both by the soundness of
its doctrine and the skill of its art.' --THE PRESS.


  ESSAYS, BIOGRAPHICAL AND CRITICAL.

Chiefly on English Poets. By DAVID MASSON. 8vo. cloth, 12s. 6d.

CONTENTS:

     I. Shakespeare and Goethe.
    II. Milton's Youth.
   III. The Three Devils: Luther's, Milton's, and Goethe's.
    IV. Dryden, and the Literature of the Restoration.
     V. Dean Swift.
    VI. Chatterton: A Story of the Year 1770.
   VII. Wordsworth.
  VIII. Scottish Influence on British Literature.
    IX. Theories of Poetry.
     X. Prose and Verse: De Quincey.

'Mr. Masson has succeeded in producing a series of criticisms in
relation to creative literature which are satisfactory as well as
subtile--which are not only ingenious, but which possess the rarer
recommendation of being usually just.' --THE TIMES.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

  RELIGIO CHEMICI.

By GEORGE WILSON, M.D. late Regius Professor of Technology in the
University of Edinburgh. Crown 8vo. cloth.

With a Vignette Title Page by NOEL PATON, engraved by C. JEENS. Price
8s. 6d.


  COUNSELS OF AN INVALID:

Letters on Religious Subjects. By GEORGE WILSON. M.D.

With Vignette Portrait. Fcp. 8vo. cloth, 4s. 6d.


  THE FIVE GATEWAYS OF KNOWLEDGE.

A popular work on the Five Senses. By GEORGE WILSON, M.D. Eighth
Thousand. In fcp. 8vo. cloth, with gilt leaves, 2s. 6d. People's Edition
in ornamental stiff cover, 1s.


  THE PROGRESS OF THE TELEGRAPH.

By GEORGE WILSON, M.D. Fcp. 8vo. 1s.


  MEMOIR OF GEORGE WILSON, M.D. F.R.S.E.

Regius Professor of Technology in the University of Edinburgh. By his
Sister, JESSIE AITKEN WILSON. With Portrait. 8vo. cloth, price 10s. 6d.

'His life was so pregnant in meaning, so rich in noble deeds, so full of
that spiritual vitality which serves to quicken life in others; it bore
witness to so many principles which we can only fully understand when we
see them in action: it presented so many real pictures of dauntless
courage and of Christian heroism, that we welcome gratefully the attempt
to reproduce it which has resulted in the volume before us. Miss Wilson
has entered lovingly upon her task, and has accomplished it well.'
--PRESS.


  MEMOIR OF EDWARD FORBES, F.R.S.
  Late Regius Professor of Natural History
    in the University of Edinburgh.

By GEORGE WILSON, M.D. F.R.S.E. and ARCHIBALD GEIKIE, F.R.S.E.

F.G.S. of the Geological Survey of Great Britain. 8vo. cloth, with
Portrait, 14s.

'We welcome this volume as a graceful tribute to the memory of as
gifted, tender, generous a soul as Science has ever reared, and
prematurely lost.' --LITERARY GAZETTE.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

  MEMOIR OF THE
  LIFE OF THE REV. ROBERT STORY,
  Late Minister of Rosneath, Dumbartonshire.

By ROBERT HERBERT STORY, Minister of Rosneath. Crown 8vo. cloth, with
Portrait, 7s. 6d.

*** This volume includes several important passages of Scottish
Religious and Ecclesiastical History during the Second Quarter of the
present Century. Among others, the ROW CONTROVERSY, the RISE of the
IRVINGITE MOVEMENT, the EARLY HISTORY of the FREE CHURCH, &c. &c.


  THE PRISON CHAPLAIN:
  A Memoir of the Rev. John Clay,
  Late Chaplain of Preston Gaol.

With selections from his Correspondence and a Sketch of Prison
Discipline in England. By his SON. With Portrait, 8vo. cloth, 15s.

'It presents a vigorous account of the Penal system in England in past
times, and in our own ... It exhibits in detail the career of one of our
latest prison reformers; alleged, we believe with truth, to have been
one of the most successful, and certainly in his judgments and opinions
one of the most cautious and reasonable, as well as one of the most
ardent.' --SATURDAY REVIEW.


  MEMOIR OF GEORGE WAGNER,
  Late Incumbent of St. Stephen's, Brighton.

By JOHN NASSAU SIMPKINSON, M.A. Rector of Brington, Northampton.

Third and cheaper Edition. Fcp. 8vo. 5s.

'A more edifying biography we have rarely met with ... If any parish
priest, discouraged by what he may consider an unpromising aspect of the
time, should be losing heart ... we recommend him to procure this
edifying memoir, to study it well, to set the example of the holy man
who is the subject of it before him in all its length and breadth, and
then he will appreciate what can be done even by one earnest man; and
gathering fresh inspiration, he will chide himself for all previous
discontent, and address himself with stronger purpose than ever to the
lowly works and lofty aims of the ministry entrusted to his charge.'
--LITERARY CHURCHMAN.


  FAMILY PRAYERS.

By the Rev. GEORGE BUTLER, M.A. Vice-Principal of Cheltenham College,
and late Fellow of Exeter College, Oxford. Crown 8vo. cloth, 5s.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

  MACMILLAN & CO.'S CAMBRIDGE SCHOOL & COLLEGE CLASS-BOOKS.

MACMILLAN & CO. have issued at intervals during the last ten years, this
Series of CAMBRIDGE CLASS-BOOKS FOR THE USE OF SCHOOLS AND COLLEGES,
which is intended to embrace all branches of Education, from the most
elementary to the most advanced, and to keep pace with the latest
discoveries in Science. A descriptive Catalogue, stating the object
aimed at in each work, with their size and prices, will be forwarded on
application. Of those hitherto published, the sale of many thousands is
a sufficient indication of the manner in which they have been
appreciated by the public.

The following SERIES of a more ELEMENTARY CHARACTER is now in course of
publication. All the Volumes in this Elementary Series will be
handsomely printed in 18mo., and published at a low price to ensure an
extensive sale in the Schools of the United Kingdom and the Colonies:--

Euclid. For Colleges and Schools. By I. TODHUNTER, M.A., F.R.S., Fellow
and Principal Mathematical Lecturer of St. John's College, Cambridge.
3s. 6d.    [Now ready.

An Elementary Latin Grammar. By H. J. ROBY, M.A., Under Master of
Dulwich College Upper School, late Fellow and Classical Lecturer of St.
John's College, Cambridge. 2s. 6d.    [Now ready.

An Elementary History of the Book of Common Prayer. By FRANCIS PROCTOR,
M.A., Vicar of Witton, Norfolk, late Fellow of St. Catharine's College,
Cambridge. 2s. 6d.    [Now ready.

Algebra for Beginners. By I. TODHUNTER, M.A., F.R.S.    [In the Press.

The School Class-Book of Arithmetic. By BARNARD SMITH, M.A., late Fellow
of St. Peter's College, Cambridge.    [In the Press.

The Bible Word-Book. A Glossary of Old English Bible Words, with
Illustrations. By J. EASTWOOD, M.A., St. John's College, Cambridge, and
Incumbent of Hope-in-Hanley, Stafford, and W. ALDIS WRIGHT, M.A.,
Trinity College, Cambridge,    [Preparing.

*** _Other Volumes will be announced in due course._


  WORKS BY I. TODHUNTER, M.A., F.R.S.,
  Fellow and Principal Mathematical Lecturer of St. John's College,
    Cambridge.

A Treatise on Algebra. For the Use of Colleges and Schools. With
numerous Examples. Third Edition, revised. Crown 8vo. cloth, 7s. 6d.

An Elementary Treatise on the Theory of Equations, with a Collection of
Examples. Crown 8vo. cloth, 7s. 6d.

A Treatise on Plane Trigonometry. For the use of Colleges and Schools.
With numerous Examples. Second edition, revised. Crown 8vo. cloth, 5s.

A Treatise on Spherical Trigonometry. For the use of Colleges and
Schools. With numerous Examples. Crown 8vo. cloth, 4s. 6d.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

A Treatise on Plane Co-ordinate Geometry, as applied to the Straight
Line and the Conic Sections. With numerous Examples. Third and cheaper
Edition. Crown 8vo. cloth, 7s. 6d.

A Treatise on the Differential Calculus. With numerous Examples. Third
Edition, revised. Crown 8vo. cloth, 10s. 6d.

A Treatise on the Integral Calculus and its Applications. With numerous
Examples. Second Edition, revised and enlarged. Crown 8vo. cloth,
10s. 6d.

A Treatise on Analytical Statics. With numerous Examples. Second
Edition, revised and enlarged. Crown 8vo. cloth, 10s. 6d.

Examples of Analytical Geometry of Three Dimensions. Crown 8vo.
cloth, 4s.

A History of the Progress of the Calculus of Variations during the
Nineteenth Century. 8vo. cloth, 12s.

Euclid for Colleges and Schools. 18mo. 3s. 6d.


  WORKS BY BARNARD SMITH, M.A.,
  Fellow of St. Peter's College, Cambridge.

Arithmetic and Algebra, in their Principles and Application. With
numerous Examples, systematically arranged. Eighth Edition, 696 pp.
(1861). Crown 8vo. strongly bound in cloth, 10s. 6d.

Arithmetic. For the use of Schools. New Edition (1862), 348 pp. Crown
8vo. strongly bound in cloth, 4s. 6d. Answers to all the Questions.

Key to the above, containing Solutions to all the Questions in the
latest Edition. Crown 8vo. 392 pp. Second Edition (1860). 8s. 6d.

Exercises in Arithmetic. 104 pp. Crown 8vo. (1860), 2s. Or with Answers,
2s. 6d. Also sold separately in 2 Parts, price 1s. each. Answers, 6d.

Plane and Spherical Trigonometry. With the Construction and Use of
Tables of Logarithms. By J. C. SNOWBALL, M.A. Ninth Edition, 240 pp.
(1856). Crown 8vo. 7s. 6d.

Plane Trigonometry. With a numerous Collection of Examples. By R. D.
BEASLEY, M.A. 106 pp. (1868). Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d.

Elementary Treatise on Mechanics. With a Collection of Examples. By S.
PARKINSON, B.D. Second Edition, 345 pp. (1860). Crown 8vo. 9s. 6d.

A Treatise on Optics. By S. PARKINSON, B.D. 304 pp. (1859). Crown 8vo.
10s. 6d.

Elementary Hydrostatics. With numerous Examples and Solutions. By J. B.
PHEAR, M.A. Second Edition. 156 pp. (1857). Crown 8vo. 5s. 6d.

Dynamics of a Particle. With numerous Examples. By P. G. TAIT, M.A. and
W. J. STEELE, M.A. 304 pp. (1856). Crown 8vo. 10s. 6d.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

Dynamics of a System of Rigid Bodies. With numerous Examples. By E. J.
ROUTH, M.A. 336 pp. (1860). Crown 8vo. 10s. 6d.

A Geometrical Treatise on Conic Sections. With Copious Examples from the
Cambridge Senate-House Papers. By W. H. DREW, M.A. Second Edition. Crown
8vo. cloth, 4s. 6d.

Solutions of the Problems contained in Drew's Conic Sections. Crown 8vo.
4s. 6d.

An Elementary Treatise on Conic Sections and Algebraic Geometry. With a
numerous Collection of Easy Examples progressively arranged, especially
designed for the use of Schools and Beginners. By G. HALE PUCKLE, M.A.
Second Edition, enlarged and improved. Crown 8vo. cloth, 7s. 6d.

Elementary Treatise on Trilinear Co-ordinates. By N. M. FERRERS, M.A.
154 pp. (1861). Crown 8vo. 6s. 6d.

A Treatise on Solid Geometry. By P. FROST, M.A. and J. WOLSTENHOLME,
M.A. 8vo. 18s.

A Treatise on the Calculus of Finite Differences. By GEOEGE BOOLE,
D.C.L. Crown 8vo. 10s. 6d.

A Treatise on Differential Equations. By GEORGE BOOLE, D.C.L. Crown 8vo.
cloth, 14s.

On the Algebraical and Numerical Theory of Errors of Observations and
the Combination of Observations. By the Astronomer Royal, G. B. AIRY,
M.A. 103 pp. (1861). 6s. 6d.

Elementary Treatise on the Planetary Theory. By C. H. CHEYNE, B.A.
Scholar of St. John's College. Crown 8vo. cloth, 6s. 6d.

A Treatise on Attractions, Laplace's Functions, and the Figure of the
Earth. By J. H. PRATT, M.A. Second Edition. Crown 8vo. 126 pp. (1861).
6s. 6d.

Collection of Mathematical Problems and Examples. With Answers. By H. A.
MORGAN, M.A. Pp. 190 (1858). Crown 8vo. 6s. 6d.

Senate-House Mathematical Problems. With Solutions.

  1848-51. By FERRERS and JACKSON. 8vo. 15s. 6d.
  1848-51. (Riders.) By JAMESON. 8vo. 7s. 6d.
  1854. By WALTON and MACKENZIE. 8vo. 10s. 6d.
  1857. By CAMPION and WALTON. 8vo. 8s. 6d.
  1860. By ROUTH and WATSON. Crown 8vo. 7s. 6d.

Mythology for Latin Versification: a Brief Sketch of the Fables of the
Ancients, prepared to be rendered into Latin Verse, for Schools. By
F. C. HODGSON, B.D., late Provost of Eton College. New Edition, revised
by F. C. HODGSON, M.A., Fellow of King's College, Cambridge. 18mo.
cloth, 3s.

Hellenica: a First Greek Reading-Book. Being a History of Greece, taken
from Diodorus and Thucydides. By JOSIAH WRIGHT, M.A. Second Edition.
Pp. 150 (1857). Fcp. 8vo. 3s. 6d.

Demosthenes on the Crown. With English Notes. By B. DRAKE, M.A. Second
Edition, to which is prefixed Æschines against Ctesiphon. With English
Notes. (1860.) Fcp. 8vo. 5s.

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *

Juvenal. For Schools. With English Notes and an Index. By JOHN E. MAYOR,
M.A. Pp. 464 (1853). Crown 8vo. 10s. 6d.

Cicero's Second Philippic. With English Notes. By JOHN E. B. MAYOR.
Pp. 168 (1861). 6s.

Help to Latin Grammar; or, the Form and Use of Words in Latin. With
Progressive Exercises. By JOSIAH WRIGHT, M.A. Pp. 176 (1855). Crown 8vo.
4s. 6d.

The Seven Kings of Rome. A First Latin Reading-Book. By JOSIAH WRIGHT,
M.A. Second Edit. Pp. 138 (1857). Fcp. 8vo. 3s.

Vocabulary and Exercises on 'The Seven Kings.' By JOSIAH WRIGHT, M.A.
Pp. 04 (1857). Fcp. 8vo. 2s. 6d.

First Latin Construing Book. By E. THRING, M.A. Pp. 104 (1855).
Fcp. 8vo. 2s. 6d.

Sallust.-- Catilina et Jugurtha. With English Notes. For Schools. By
CHARLES MERIVALE, B.D. Second Edition. 172 pp. (1858). Fcp. 8vo. 4s. 6d.
Catilina and Jugurtha may be had separately, price 2s. 6d. each.

Æschyli Eumenides. The Greek Text with English Notes and an
Introduction, containing an Analysis of Müller's Dissertations. By
BERNARD DRAKE, M.A. 8vo. 7s. 6d.

St. Paul's Epistle to the Romans. With Notes. By CHARLES JOHN VAUGHAN,
D.D. Second Edition (1861). Crown 8vo. 5s.

The Elements of Grammar taught in English. By E. THRING, M.A. Third
Edition. 18mo. bound in cloth, 2s.

The Child's English Grammar: being the Substance of the above. With
Examples for Practice. Adapted for Junior Classes. By E. THRING, M.A.
A New Edition. 18mo. limp cloth, 1s.


WORKS IN PREPARATION.

An Elementary Treatise on Natural Philosophy. By WILLIAM THOMSON, LL.D.,
F.R.S., late Fellow of St. Peter's College, Cambridge, Professor of
Natural Philosophy in the University of Glasgow; and PETER GUTHRIE TAIT,
M.A., late Fellow of St. Peter's College, Cambridge, Professor of
Natural Philosophy in the University of Edinburgh. With numerous
Illustrations.    [In the press.

An Elementary Treatise on Quaternions: with numerous Examples. By P. G.
TAIT, M.A., Professor of Natural Philosophy in the University of
Edinburgh.    [Preparing.

The New Testament in the Original Greek. Text revised by B. F. WESTCOTT,
M.A. and F. J. HORT, M.A., formerly Fellows of Trinity College.
    [Preparing.

  THE NARRATIVE OF ODYSSEUS.

Homer's Odyssey. Books IX--XII. The Greek Text, with English Notes, for
Schools and Colleges. By JOHN E. B. MAJOR, Fellow and Principal
Classical Lecturer of St. John's College, Cambridge.
    [In the press.


SPOTTISWOODE AND CO., PRINTERS, NEW-STREET SQUARE, LONDON





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Works of William Shakespeare
[Cambridge Edition] [9 vols.], by William Shakespeare

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WORKS OF SHAKESPEARE ***

***** This file should be named 23041-8.txt or 23041-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/0/4/23041/

Produced by Louise Hope, Jonathan Ingram and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
