The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Works of William Shakespeare [Cambridge
Edition] [Vol. 8 of 9 vols.], by William Shakespeare

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Works of William Shakespeare [Cambridge Edition] [Vol. 8 of 9 vols.]

Author: William Shakespeare

Editor: William George Clark
        John Glover

Release Date: May 21, 2015 [EBook #49008]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WORKS OF WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE VOL 8 ***




Produced by Richard Tonsing, Jonathan Ingram and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






                              _THE WORKS_

                                  OF

                          WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE




                               THE WORKS

                                  OF

                          WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE


                               EDITED BY

                      WILLIAM GEORGE CLARK, M.A.
     FELLOW AND TUTOR OF TRINITY COLLEGE, AND PUBLIC ORATOR IN THE
                       UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE;

                    AND WILLIAM ALDIS WRIGHT, M.A.
               LIBRARIAN OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.

                            _VOLUME VIII._

                         London and Cambridge:
                           MACMILLAN AND CO.
                                 1866.

                              CAMBRIDGE:
                      PRINTED BY C. J. CLAY, M.A.
                       AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS.




CONTENTS.


                                                                    PAGE

  THE Preface                                                        vii

  HAMLET                                                               3

  Notes to Hamlet                                                    185

  The Tragicall Historie of Hamlet Prince of Denmarke                197

  KING LEAR                                                          249

  Notes to King Lear                                                 427

  OTHELLO                                                            437

  Notes to Othello                                                   593




PREFACE.


1. The earliest edition of HAMLET appeared in 1603, with the following
title-page:

    THE | Tragicall Historie of | HAMLET | _Prince of Denmarke_
    | By William Shake-speare. | As it hath beene diuerse times
    acted by his Highnesse ser-| uants in the Cittie of London: as
    also in the two V-| niuersities of Cambridge and Oxford, and
    else-where | At London printed for N: L. and Iohn Trundell. |
    1603.

We refer to it as (Q₁).

A copy of this edition belonged to Sir Thomas Hanmer, though he does
not appear to have mentioned it in his notes to Shakespeare or in his
correspondence, and its existence was not known till his library came
into the possession of Sir E. H. Bunbury in 1821. In a copy of the
Reprint of 1825, now at Barton, Sir E. H. Bunbury wrote the following
note:

'The only copy of this edition of Hamlet (1603) which is known to be
in existence was found by me in the Library at Barton when it came
into my possession in 1821. The Hamlet was bound up with ten others of
the small 4to editions of Shakespeare's Plays (1598 to 1603) and with
The Two Noble Kinsmen (1634). Most of these were complete. I sold the
volume in Dec. 1824 for £180 to Messrs Payne and Foss, who resold it to
the Duke of Devonshire for £230.'

This copy wanted the last leaf containing the 22 concluding lines.
A second copy, wanting the title-page but otherwise perfect, was
discovered in 1856 by Mr W. H. Rooney of Dublin. 'It was bought,' says
Mr Timmins, 'by Mr Rooney from a student of Trinity College, Dublin,
who had brought it from Nottinghamshire with his other books. After
reprinting the last leaf, Mr Rooney sold the pamphlet to Mr Boone for
£70, from whom Mr J. O. Halliwell bought it for £120, and it is now in
the British Museum.'

We have reprinted this edition, and recorded in foot-notes the few
discrepancies which are found between the two copies.

An extremely accurate reprint was made from the Devonshire copy in
1825, and it was lithographed in facsimile, with the addition of the
missing leaf, in 1858, under the direction of Mr Collier and at the
expense of the Duke. In 1860 Mr J. Allen, Junr., reprinted this edition
and the Quarto of 1604, placing the corresponding passages as nearly as
possible on opposite pages, with a preface by Mr Samuel Timmins.

The edition of 1603 is obviously a very imperfect reproduction of the
play, and there is every reason to believe that it was printed from
a manuscript surreptitiously obtained. This manuscript may have been
compiled in the first instance from short hand notes taken during the
representation, but there are many errors in the printed text which
seem like errors of a copyist rather than of a hearer. Compare for
example lines 37, 38 of Scene III. of our Reprint, p. 205, with the
corresponding lines of the more perfect drama as it was printed in the
Quarto of 1604, Act I. Scene 3, lines 73, 74, p. 26.

In the Quarto of 1603 the passage runs thus:

    And they of _France_ of the chiefe rancke and station
    Are of a most select and generall chiefe in that:

In that of 1604:

    'And they in Fraunce of the best ranck and station,
    Or of a most select and generous, chiefe in that:'

It is clear that the corruption in both passages is due to an error in
the transcript from which both were copied. Probably the author had
originally written:

    'And they in France of the best rank and station
    Are most select and generous in that:'

and then given between the lines or in the margin, 'of,' 'chief',
meaning these as alternative readings for 'in' and 'best' in the first
line. The transcriber by mistake inserted them in the second line. A
few lines above both Quartos give 'courage' for 'comrade,' a mistake
due undoubtedly to the eye and not to the ear.

We believe then that the defects of the manuscript from which the
Quarto of 1603 was printed had been in part at least supplemented by
a reference to the authentic copy in the library of the theatre. Very
probably the man employed for this purpose was some inferior actor or
servant, who would necessarily work in haste and by stealth, and in any
case would not be likely to work very conscientiously for the printer
or bookseller who was paying him to deceive his masters.

The Quarto of 1604, which we call Q₂, has the following title-page:

    _THE_ | Tragicall Historie of | HAMLET, | _Prince of Denmarke_.
    | By William Shakespeare. | Newly imprinted and enlarged to
    almost as much | againe as it was, according to the true and
    perfect | Coppie. | AT LONDON, | Printed by I. R. for N. L. and
    are to be sold at his | shoppe vnder Saint Dunstons Church in |
    Fleetstreet. 1604.

The printer 'I. R.' was no doubt, as Mr Collier says, James Roberts,
who had made an entry in the books of the Stationers' company as
early as July 26, 1602, of 'A booke, The Revenge of Hamlett prince
of Denmarke, as yt was latelie acted by the Lord Chamberleyn his
servantes.'

For some unknown reason the projected edition was delayed, and in the
mean time the popularity of the play encouraged N. L., i.e. Nicholas
Ling, and the other publisher, Trundell, to undertake a surreptitious
edition.

In the interval between the two editions Shakespeare seems to have
changed the names of some of his Dramatis Personæ, substituting
'Polonius' for 'Corambis' and 'Reynaldo' for 'Montano.' He may also
have changed the order of one or two scenes, and here and there erased
or inserted a few lines, but we think that no substantial change
was made, and that the chief differences between (Q₁) and Q₂ are
only such as might be expected between a bona fide, and a mala fide,
transcription.

The Quarto of 1605, which we call Q₃, is not, properly speaking, a new
edition, being printed from the same forms as Q₂, and differing from it
no more than one copy of the same edition may differ from another. The
title-page differs only in the date, where 1605 is substituted for 1604.

Another Quarto, our Q₄, printed in 1611, bears a title-page which does
not substantially differ from that of Q₃, except that it is said to be:

    'Printed for _Iohn Smethwicke_, and are to be sold at his
    shoppe | in Saint Dunstons Church-yeard in Fleetstreet. | Under
    the Diall. 1611. |'

Another Quarto, without date, is said on the title-page to be 'Newly
imprinted and inlarged, according to the true | and perfect Copy lastly
Printed,' and to be 'Printed by W. S. for _Iohn Smethwicke_.' Otherwise
the title-page is identical with that of Q₄. Mr Collier supposes this
undated Quarto to have been printed in 1607, because there is an entry
in the Stationers' books of that year and no edition with that date is
known to exist. We are convinced however that the undated Quarto was
printed from that of 1611, and we have therefore called it Q₅.

Another Quarto, printed 'by _R. Young_ for _John Smethwicke_,' was
published in 1637. This we call Q₆. It is printed from Q₅, though the
spelling is considerably modernized and the punctuation amended.

The symbol Qq signifies the agreement of Q₂, Q₃, Q₄, Q₅ and Q₆.

Besides these, several editions, usually known as Players' Quartos,
were printed at the end of the seventeenth and beginning of the
following century. Of these we have had before us during our collation,
editions of 1676, 1685, 1695 and 1703. These we call respectively
Q(1676), Q(1685), Q(1695) and Q(1703). We have given all readings
which seemed in any way remarkable, though we need scarcely say that
the changes made in these editions have no authority whatever. It is
however worthy of notice that many emendations usually attributed to
Rowe and Pope are really derived from one or other of these Players'
Quartos. When we give a reading as belonging to one of these Quartos,
it is to be understood that it occurs there for the first time and that
all the subsequent Quartos adopt it.

The text of Hamlet given in the Folio of 1623 is not derived from any
of the previously existing Quartos, but from an independent manuscript.
Many passages are found in the Folio which do not appear in any of the
Quartos. On the other hand many passages found in the Quartos are not
found in the Folio. It is to be remarked that several of those which
appear in the Folio and not in the Quarto of 1604 or its successors,
are found in an imperfect form in the Quarto of 1603, and therefore are
not subsequent additions. Both the Quarto text of 1604 and the Folio
text of 1623 seem to have been derived from manuscripts of the play
curtailed, and curtailed differently, for purposes of representation.
Therefore in giving in our text all the passages from both Folio and
Quarto we are reproducing, as near as may be, the work as it was
originally written by Shakespeare, or rather as finally retouched by
him after the spurious edition of 1603.

We have been unable to procure a copy of the Quarto edition of this
play, edited in 1703 by 'the accurate Mr John Hughs' (Theobald's
_Shakespeare Restored_, p. 26), and have therefore quoted the readings
of it on Theobald's authority. It is different from the Players'
Quarto of 1703, and is not mentioned in Bohn's edition of Lowndes's
_Bibliographer's Manual_. No copy of it exists in the British Museum,
the Bodleian, the library of the Duke of Devonshire, the Capell
collection, or any other to which we have had access.

We have to thank Dr C. M. Ingleby for the loan of several editions of
_Hamlet_ which we should otherwise have had difficulty in procuring.

2. KING LEAR first appeared in 1608. In this year there were two
editions in Quarto. One bears the following title:

    M. William Shakespeare, | _HIS_ | True Chronicle History of the
    life | and death of King _Lear_, and his | _three Daughters_. |
    _With the unfortunate life of_ EDGAR, | sonne and heire to the
    Earle of _Glocester_, and | _his sullen and assumed humour of_
    TOM | of Bedlam. | _As it was plaid before the Kings Maiesty
    at White-Hall, vp-_ | _on S. Stephens night, in Christmas
    Hollidaies_. | By his Maiesties Seruants, playing vsually at
    the | _Globe_ on the _Banck-side_. | Printed for _Nathaniel
    Butter_. | 1608. |

The printer's device is that of J. Roberts.

This we have called Q₁. In the few instances in which there are
differences between Capell's copy and that in the Duke of Devonshire's
library, we have distinguished the readings as those of Q₁ (Cap.) and
Q₁ (Dev.) respectively. Through the kindness of Sir S. Morton Peto and
Mr Lilly, we have been enabled to collate two other copies, but without
discovering any variations from that in the Capell collection.

In the same year another Quarto edition of this play was issued by the
same publisher. Its title is as follows:

    M. William Shak-speare: | _HIS_ | True Chronicle Historie of
    the life and | death of King LEAR and his three | Daughters.
    | _With the vnfortunate life of_ Edgar, _sonne_ | and heire
    to the Earle of Gloster, and his | sullen and assumed humor
    of | TOM of Bedlam: | _As it was played before the Kings
    Maiestie at Whitehall vpon_ | _S._ Stephans _night in Christmas
    Hollidayes_. | By his Maiesties seruants playing vsually at
    the Gloabe | on the Bancke-side. | _LONDON_,| Printed for
    _Nathaniel Butter_, and are to be sold at his shop in _Pauls_ |
    Church-yard at the signe of the Pide Bull neere | Sᵗ. _Austins_
    Gate. 1608. |

We have called this Q₂. In the six copies we have collated there are a
large number of very curious and important variations. To distinguish
them we have made use of the following notation.

1. Q₂ (Cap.) The copy in Capell's collection.

2. Q₂ (Dev.) The copy in the Library of the Duke of Devonshire.

3. Q₂ (Mus. per.) A perfect copy in the British Museum (C. 34. K. 18).

4. Q₂ (Mus. imp.) An imperfect copy (wanting title) in the British
Museum (C. 34. K. 17); formerly in the possession of Mr Halliwell.

5. Q₂ (Bodl. 1). A copy in the Bodleian Library (Malone 35), with the
title, but wanting the last leaf.

6. Q₂ (Bodl. 2). A copy in the Bodleian Library (Malone 37), wanting
title but having the last leaf.

It has been supposed in consequence of statements made by Malone and
Boswell that a third edition of King Lear was published in 1608.
We shall show that there is no evidence for this. In the _Variorum
Shakespeare_ (II. 652), edited by Boswell in 1821, three Quartos are
described, which are distinguished in the notes to the play by the
letters A, B, C, respectively. The first of these is a copy of Q₂,
quoted by us as Q₂ (Bodl. 1); the second is a copy of Q₁; and the
third, which is in reality another copy of Q₂ and is quoted by us as Q₂
(Bodl. 2), is described as follows:

"Title the same as the two former, except that like the first it begins
at signature B: and like the second, has no reference to the place of
sale."

This statement of Boswell's is taken from a note in Malone's
handwriting prefixed to the copy in question, which we transcribe.

"This copy of King Lear differs in some particulars from the two others
in Vol. IV.

"The title-page of it is the same as the second of those copies, that
is, it has no direction to the place of sale, and the first signat.
is B,--notwithstanding which there are minute diversities; thus, in
this copy in H₃ verso, we have 'A _foole_ vsurps my _bed_'; in the
other whose first signature is also B, we find--'My _foote_ usurps my
_body_', and in the copy without any direction to the place of sale
(whose first signature is A) 'My _foote_ usurps my _head_'."

Now it is a little remarkable that at present the copy has no
title-page at all, and there is no trace of the title-page having
been removed since the volume has been in its present condition. The
probability is that the title was originally wanting and that one had
been supplied from a copy of Q₁ before it came into Malone's hands, and
that while it was in this condition he wrote the above note upon it. It
was then sent to be bound in a volume with other quartos, and the title
may have been lost at the binder's, or may have been intentionally
removed as not belonging to the book. That alterations were made by the
binder is evident from the fact that the copy to which Malone refers as
the _second_ of those in Vol. IV. is in reality the _first_. Malone,
writing his note when Vol. IV. was arranged for binding, described
the then order of the plays, which must afterwards have been altered.
In any case, however Malone's statement is to be accounted for, it is
quite clear that Boswell must have described the Quarto after it was
bound, when the title could not have existed.

We have said that Boswell quotes the three Quartos of Lear, now in the
Bodleian, by the letters A, B, C, respectively. In doing so, however,
he is not consistent. We record his mistakes that others may not be
misled by them. Bearing in mind therefore that A = Q₂ (Bodl. 1), B =
Q₁, and C = Q₂ (Bodl. 2), we find in Act II. Scene 2 (Vol. X. p. 97)
'Quarto B, _ausrent_; Quarto A, reads _unreverent_.' Here B and A
should change places. In Act III. Scene 7 (p. 188), 'Quarto A omits
_roguish_:' for A read C. In Act IV. Scene 2 (p. 199), for 'Quartos B
and C, _the whistling_,' read 'Quarto C' alone. In Act IV. Scene 6 (p.
220) B and A should again be interchanged. In Act V. Scene 3 (p. 277),
'Quarto A omits this line'; for A read B. It will be seen from these
instances that A has been in turn made to represent three different
copies.

The differences in various copies of Q₂ are accounted for by supposing
that the corrections were made before the sheets were all worked
off, and that the corrected and uncorrected sheets were bound up
indiscriminately. It will be observed that the readings of the
uncorrected sheets of Q₂ agree for the most part with those of Q₁,
and this led us to the conclusion which had previously been arrived
at by Capell and also by J. P. Kemble, that the edition which we have
called Q₁ was the earlier of the two printed in the same year. But upon
collating a copy of Q₂ in the Bodleian, which we have called Q₂ (Bodl.
1), we found evidence which points to an opposite conclusion. In Kent's
soliloquy (II. 2. 160) that copy, as will be seen in our notes, reads,

          nothing almost sees _my rackles_
    But miserie, &c.

which of course is an accidental corruption, by displacement of the
type, of 'myrackles' (i.e. 'miracles') the true reading. In the
corrected copies of Q₂ this is altered, apparently by the printer's
conjecture, to 'my wracke', which is also the reading of Q₁. Throughout
the sheet in which this occurs the readings of Q₁ agree with the
corrected copies of Q₂, and had it not been for the instance quoted, we
might have supposed that the corrections in the latter were made from
Q₁. But the corruption 'my rackles' for 'miracles' must have come from
the original MS., and 'my wracke' is only a conjectural emendation, so
that the order of succession in this sheet at least appears to be the
following. First the uncorrected copy of Q₂, then the same corrected,
and lastly Q₁. On the other hand it is remarkable that Q₁, if printed
from Q₂ at all, must have been printed from a copy made up, with the
exception just mentioned from II. 1. 128 to II. 4. 133, and another
containing from IV. 6. 224 to V. 3. 64, of uncorrected sheets. Another
hypothesis which might be made is that Q₁ and Q₂ were printed from the
same manuscript, and that the printer of Q₁ corrupted 'miracles' into
'my wracke', while the printer of Q₂ made it 'my rackles', which was
afterwards altered by a reference to Q₁. The question, however, is
very difficult to decide, and at most is one rather of bibliographical
curiosity than of critical importance. We may mention that, without
giving the reasons for his conclusion, Jennens, in his edition of
_Lear_ in 1770, quotes as the 1st Quarto that which we have called Q₂
and vice versa.

A third Quarto, which we have called Q₃, was printed very carelessly
page for page from Q₁ and published in 1655.

In the first Folio _King Lear_ was printed from an independent
manuscript, and its text is on the whole much superior to that of the
Quartos. Each however supplies passages which are wanting in the other.

Capell appears to have prepared the play for press in the first
instance from Pope's first edition. The manuscript readings and stage
directions, marked in his copy of that edition but not adopted in his
own, we have quoted as 'Capell MS'.

       *       *       *       *       *

3. OTHELLO was first printed in Quarto in 1622 with the following title:

    THE | Tragœdy of Othello, | The Moore of Venice. | _As it
    hath beene diuerse times acted at the_ | Globe, and at the
    Black-Friers, by | _his Maiesties Seruants_. | _Written by_
    William Shakespeare. | _LONDON_,| Printed by _N. O._ for
    _Thomas Walkley_, and are to be sold at his | shop, at the
    Eagle and Child, in Brittans Bursse. | 1622. |

To this edition which we call Q₁, the following preface was affixed by
the publisher:

                     The Stationer to the Reader.

    _To set forth a booke without an Epistle, were like to the old
    English prouerbe_, A blew coat without a badge, _& the Author
    being dead, I thought good to take that piece of worke vpon
    mee: To commend it, I will not, for that which is good, I hope
    euery man will commend, without intreaty: and I am the bolder,
    because the Authors name is sufficient to vent his worke. Thus
    leauing euery one to the liberty of iudgement: I haue ventered
    to print this Play, and leaue it to the generall censure._

                                                                _Yours_,

                                                         Thomas Walkley.

This first Quarto contains many oaths and expletives, which in all the
later editions are altered or omitted. This shows that the MS. from
which it was printed had not been recently used as an acting copy. Many
passages are omitted in Q₁, by accident or design, and some which we
find only in the later editions look like afterthoughts of the author.

The title-page of the second Quarto is letter for letter the same as
the first, except that it has the following imprint:

    _LONDON_,| Printed by _A. M._ for _Richard Hawkins_, and are to
    be sold at | his shoppe in Chancery-Lane, neere Sergeants-Inne.
    | 1630. |

Of this Quarto, which we term Q₂, Mr Collier says: 'It was
unquestionably printed from a manuscript different from that used for
the Quarto of 1622, or for the Folio of 1623.' But after a minute
comparison of the two it appears to us clear that the Quarto of 1630
must have been printed from a copy of the Quarto of 1622, which had
received additions and corrections in manuscript. The resemblances
between the two are too close to allow of any other supposition. These
additions and corrections, though agreeing for the most part with the
first Folio, which had appeared in the interval, were derived from an
independent source.

The third Quarto, which we refer to as Q₃, was printed from the second,
and is called 'The Fourth Edition.' It has the following imprint:

    _LONDON_, | Printed for _William Leak_ at the _Crown_ _in
    Fleet-_ | _street_, between the two Temple Gates, 1655 |

Jennens, in his edition of _Othello_, published in 1773, was not aware
of the existence of the Quarto of 1630, and quotes as the readings of
the second Quarto those of the edition of 1655.

An edition in Quarto, without date, is quoted by Capell on the
authority of Pope; but on reference to Pope's list it appears that,
though he has omitted the date, he refers to the Quarto of 1622, which
contains the publisher's preface.

The kindness of Sir S. Morton Peto has enabled us to consult a copy of
the first Quarto in the library at Chipstead, which, in cases where its
readings differ from those of the copies in the Capell and Devonshire
collections, we have distinguished as Q₁ (Chip.) A Players' Quarto of
1695, for the use of which, as well as for other acts of kindness, we
have to thank Sir Charles Bunbury, is quoted as Q (1695).

In the Addenda we have given some readings which we had not previously
seen from an anonymous tract published in 1752, with the title,
_Miscellaneous Observations on the Tragedy of Hamlet, Prince of
Denmark_. The rest are chiefly from books which have been published
since the greater part of our volume was struck off.

                                                                W. G. C.
                                                                W. A. W.


ADDENDA.

    HAMLET, I. 1. 117, 118. Add to note, _As stars with ...
                Distempered_ or _As stars with ... Discoloured_
                Staunton conj.

          I. 4. 36, 37. Add to note, _the dram of leaven ... of
                a dough_ Cartwright conj. _the dram of evil ... oft
                weigh down_ Bailey conj.

          I. 4. 73. _your ... reason_] _of sovereignty your_
                Hunter conj.

          I. 5. 11. _And for_] _Tho' in_ Anon. MS.

          I. 5. 32, 34. _shouldst ... Wouldst_] _wouldst ...
                Shouldst_ Anon. conj. (Misc. Obs. on Hamlet, 1752).

          II. 2. 82. Add to note, _And think upon and answer_
                Anon. conj. (Misc. Obs. on Hamlet, 1752).

          II. 2. 140. _out of thy star_] _out of thy soar_ Bailey
                conj.

          II. 2. 162. _Be ... then;_] _Let ... then_ Anon. conj.
                (Misc. Obs. on Hamlet, 1752).

          II. 2. 438, 439. _tyrannous ... murder_] _treacherous
                and damned light To the vile murtherer_ Anon. conj.
                (Misc. Obs. on Hamlet, 1752).

          III. 1. 58. _slings and arrows_] _stings and harrows_
                Anon. conj. (Misc. Obs. on Hamlet, 1752). _stings
                and horrors_ Anon. MS.

          III. 2. 21. _scorn_] _sin_ Bailey conj.

          III. 2. 22. _the very age_] _the visage_ Bailey conj.

          III. 2. 23. _pressure_] _posture_ Bailey conj.

          III. 2. 206. _Nor ... give_] _Let earth not give me_
                Anon. conj. (Misc. Obs. on Hamlet, 1752).

          III. 3. 15. _The cease of_] _Deceasing_ Bailey conj.

          III. 3. 169. Add to note, _And either house_ Bailey conj.

          IV. 7. 112. _begun_] _begnawn_ Bailey conj.

          V. 2, 180. _and outward ... a kind_] _and out of the
                habit of encounter get a kind_ Bailey conj.

          V. 2. 180, 181. _collection_] _diction_ Bailey conj.

          V. 2. 182. Add to note, _profound and renowned_ Bailey
                conj.

    KING LEAR, I. 1. 72. Add to note, _precious treasure_
                Bailey conj.

          I. 1. 226. Add to note, _burden, or_ Bailey conj.

          II. 4. 92. Add to note, _Fiery? what? quality?_ Taylor
                conj. MS.




HAMLET.




DRAMATIS PERSONÆ[A].


  CLAUDIUS, king of Denmark.
  HAMLET, son to the late, and nephew to the present king.
  POLONIUS, lord chamberlain.
  HORATIO, friend to Hamlet.
  LAERTES, son to Polonius.

  VOLTIMAND,     }
  CORNELIUS,     }
  ROSENCRANTZ,   }   courtiers.
  GUILDENSTERN,  }
  OSRIC,         }
  A Gentleman,   }
  A Priest.
  MARCELLUS,  }  officers.
  BERNARDO,   }
  FRANCISCO, a soldier.
  REYNALDO, servant to Polonius.
  Players.
  Two Clowns, grave-diggers.
  FORTINBRAS, prince of Norway.
  A Captain.
  English Ambassadors.

  GERTRUDE, queen of Denmark, and mother to Hamlet.
  OPHELIA, daughter to Polonius.

   Lords, Ladies, Officers, Soldiers, Sailors, Messengers, and other
                              Attendants.

                       Ghost of Hamlet's Father.

                         SCENE: _Denmark_[B].

[A] DRAMATIS PERSONÆ.] First given by Rowe.

[B] Denmark] Edd. (Globe ed.) Elsinoor. Rowe.

                            THE TRAGEDY OF
                                HAMLET
                          PRINCE OF DENMARK.




ACT I.


SCENE I. _Elsinore. A platform before the castle._

           FRANCISCO _at his post. Enter to him_ BERNARDO.[1]

    _Ber._ Who's there?[2][3]

    _Fran._ Nay, answer me: stand, and unfold yourself.[3]

    _Ber._ Long live the king![3]

    _Fran._ Bernardo?[3][4]

    _Ber._ He.[3]                                                      5

    _Fran._ You come most carefully upon your hour.[5]

    _Ber._ 'Tis now struck twelve; get thee to bed, Francisco.[6]

    _Fran._ For this relief much thanks: 'tis bitter cold,
    And I am sick at heart.

    _Ber._ Have you had quiet guard?

    _Fran._                          Not a mouse stirring.            10

    _Ber._ Well, good night.[7]
    If you do meet Horatio and Marcellus,[7][8]
    The rivals of my watch, bid them make haste.[7][8]

    _Fran._ I think I hear them. Stand, ho! Who is there?[9]

                    _Enter_ HORATIO _and_ MARCELLUS.

    _Hor._ Friends to this ground.

    _Mar._                         And liegemen to the Dane.          15

    _Fran._ Give you good night.[10]

    _Mar._                       O, farewell, honest soldier:[11][12]
    Who hath relieved you?[13]

    _Fran._                Bernardo hath my place.[13]
    Give you good night.                                [_Exit._[10][13]

    _Mar._               Holla! Bernardo!

    _Ber._                                Say,[14][15]
    What, is Horatio there?[14]

    _Hor._                  A piece of him.[16]

    _Ber._ Welcome, Horatio: welcome, good Marcellus.                 20

    _Mar._ What, has this thing appear'd again to-night?[17]

    _Ber._ I have seen nothing.

    _Mar._ Horatio says 'tis but our fantasy,[18]
    And will not let belief take hold of him
    Touching this dreaded sight, twice seen of us:[19]                25
    Therefore I have entreated him along[20]
    With us to watch the minutes of this night,[20]
    That if again this apparition come,
    He may approve our eyes and speak to it.

    _Hor._ Tush, tush, 'twill not appear.

    _Ber._                               Sit down awhile;[21]         30
    And let us once again assail your ears,
    That are so fortified against our story,[22]
    What we have two nights seen.[22][23]

    _Hor._                        Well, sit we down,
    And let us hear Bernardo speak of this.

    _Ber._ Last night of all,                                         35
    When yond same star that's westward from the pole[24]
    Had made his course to illume that part of heaven[25]
    Where now it burns, Marcellus and myself,
    The bell then beating one,--[26]

                             _Enter_ Ghost.

    _Mar._ Peace, break thee off; look, where it comes again![27]     40

    _Ber._ In the same figure, like the king that's dead.

    _Mar._ Thou art a scholar; speak to it, Horatio.

    _Ber._ Looks it not like the king? mark it, Horatio.[28]

    _Hor._ Most like: it harrows me with fear and wonder.[29]

    _Ber._ It would be spoke to.

    _Mar._                       Question it, Horatio.[30]            45

    _Hor._ What art thou, that usurp'st this time of night,[31]
    Together with that fair and warlike form
    In which the majesty of buried Denmark
    Did sometimes march? by heaven I charge thee, speak![32]

    _Mar._ It is offended.

    _Ber._                 See, it stalks away!                       50

    _Hor._ Stay! speak, speak! I charge thee, speak![33]

                                                          [_Exit Ghost._

    _Mar._ 'Tis gone, and will not answer.

    _Ber._ How now, Horatio! you tremble and look pale:
    Is not this something more than fantasy?
    What think you on't?[34]                                          55

    _Hor._ Before my God, I might not this believe[35]
    Without the sensible and true avouch[36]
    Of mine own eyes.

    _Mar._            Is it not like the king?

    _Hor._ As thou art to thyself:
    Such was the very armour he had on[37]                            60
    When he the ambitious Norway combated;[38]
    So frown'd he once, when, in an angry parle,
    He smote the sledded Polacks on the ice.[39]
    'Tis strange.[40]

    _Mar._ Thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour,[41]         65
    With martial stalk hath he gone by our watch.[42]

    _Hor._ In what particular thought to work I know not;[43]
    But, in the gross and scope of my opinion,[44]
    This bodes some strange eruption to our state.

    _Mar._ Good now, sit down, and tell me, he that knows,[45]        70
    Why this same strict and most observant watch
    So nightly toils the subject of the land,[46]
    And why such daily cast of brazen cannon,[47]
    And foreign mart for implements of war;
    Why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task                  75
    Does not divide the Sunday from the week;[48]
    What might be toward, that this sweaty haste
    Doth make the night joint-labourer with the day:[49]
    Who is't that can inform me?

    _Hor._                       That can I;
    At least the whisper goes so. Our last king,                      80
    Whose image even but now appear'd to us,
    Was, as you know, by Fortinbras of Norway,
    Thereto prick'd on by a most emulate pride,[50]
    Dared to the combat; in which our valiant Hamlet--[51]
    For so this side of our known world esteem'd him--                85
    Did slay this Fortinbras; who by a seal'd compact,[52]
    Well ratified by law and heraldry,[53]
    Did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands[54]
    Which he stood seized of, to the conqueror:[55]
    Against the which, a moiety competent                             90
    Was gaged by our king; which had return'd[56]
    To the inheritance of Fortinbras,
    Had he been vanquisher; as, by the same covenant[57]
    And carriage of the article design'd,[58]
    His fell to Hamlet. Now, sir, young Fortinbras,[59]               95
    Of unimproved mettle hot and full,[60]
    Hath in the skirts of Norway here and there
    Shark'd up a list of lawless resolutes,[61][62]
    For food and diet, to some enterprise[62]
    That hath a stomach in't: which is no other--[63]                100
    As it doth well appear unto our state--[64]
    But to recover of us, by strong hand
    And terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands[65]
    So by his father lost: and this, I take it,
    Is the main motive of our preparations,                          105
    The source of this our watch and the chief head
    Of this post-haste and romage in the land.

    _Ber._ I think it be no other but e'en so:[66][67]
    Well may it sort, that this portentous figure[66]
    Comes armed through our watch, so like the king[66]              110
    That was and is the question of these wars.[66]

    _Hor._ A mote it is to trouble the mind's eye.[66][68]
    In the most high and palmy state of Rome,[66][69]
    A little ere the mightiest Julius fell,[66]
    The graves stood tenantless, and the sheeted dead[66][70]        115
    Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets:[66][71]
          .    .    .    .    .    .    .
    As stars with trains of fire and dews of blood,[66][72][73]
    Disasters in the sun; and the moist star,[66][74][73]
    Upon whose influence Neptune's empire stands,[66]
    Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse:[66]                    120
    And even the like precurse of fierce events,[66][75]
    As harbingers preceding still the fates[66][76]
    And prologue to the omen coming on,[66][77]
    Have heaven and earth together demonstrated[66]
    Unto our climatures and countrymen.[66][78]                      125

                           _Re-enter_ Ghost.

    But soft, behold! lo, where it comes again!
    I'll cross it, though it blast me. Stay, illusion![79]
    If thou hast any sound, or use of voice,
    Speak to me:[80]
    If there be any good thing to be done,[80]                       130
    That may to thee do ease and grace to me,[81]
    Speak to me:[81]
    If thou art privy to thy country's fate,
    Which, happily, foreknowing may avoid,[82][83]
    O, speak![82]                                                    135
    Or if thou hast uphoarded in thy life
    Extorted treasure in the womb of earth,
    For which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death,[84]
    Speak of it: stay, and speak! [_The cock crows._] Stop it,
               Marcellus.[85]

    _Mar._ Shall I strike at it with my partisan?[86]                140

    _Hor._ Do, if it will not stand.[87][88]

    _Ber._                            'Tis here![87]

    _Hor._                                       'Tis here![87]

    _Mar._ 'Tis gone!                             [_Exit Ghost._[87][89]
    We do it wrong, being so majestical,
    To offer it the show of violence;
    For it is, as the air, invulnerable,[90]                         145
    And our vain blows malicious mockery.

    _Ber._ It was about to speak, when the cock crew.

    _Hor._ And then it started like a guilty thing
    Upon a fearful summons. I have heard,
    The cock, that is the trumpet to the morn,[91]                   150
    Doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat
    Awake the god of day, and at his warning,[92]
    Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air,[92]
    The extravagant and erring spirit hies[92][93]
    To his confine: and of the truth herein[92]                      155
    This present object made probation.

    _Mar._ It faded on the crowing of the cock.[94]
    Some say that ever 'gainst that season comes[95]
    Wherein our Saviour's birth is celebrated,
    The bird of dawning singeth all night long:[96]                  160
    And then, they say, no spirit dare stir abroad,[97]
    The nights are wholesome, then no planets strike,
    No fairy takes nor witch hath power to charm,[98]
    So hallow'd and so gracious is the time.[99]

    _Hor._ So have I heard and do in part believe it.                165
    But look, the morn, in russet mantle clad,
    Walks o'er the dew of yon high eastward hill:[100]
    Break we our watch up; and by my advice,[101]
    Let us impart what we have seen to-night
    Unto young Hamlet; for, upon my life,[102]                       170
    This spirit, dumb to us, will speak to him:
    Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it,[103]
    As needful in our loves, fitting our duty?

    _Mar._ Let's do't, I pray; and I this morning know[104]
    Where we shall find him most conveniently.      [_Exeunt._[105]  175


SCENE II. _A room of state in the castle._

     _Flourish. Enter the_ KING, QUEEN, HAMLET, POLONIUS, LAERTES,
          VOLTIMAND, CORNELIUS, Lords, _and_ Attendants.[106]

    _King._ Though yet of Hamlet our dear brother's death[107]
    The memory be green, and that it us befitted[107][108]
    To bear our hearts in grief and our whole kingdom[109]
    To be contracted in one brow of woe,
    Yet so far hath discretion fought with nature                      5
    That we with wisest sorrow think on him,
    Together with remembrance of ourselves.
    Therefore our sometime sister, now our queen,[110]
    The imperial jointress to this warlike state,[111]
    Have we, as 'twere with a defeated joy,--                         10
    With an auspicious and a dropping eye,[112]
    With mirth in funeral and with dirge in marriage,
    In equal scale weighing delight and dole,--
    Taken to wife: nor have we herein barr'd
    Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone                       15
    With this affair along. For all, our thanks.[113]
    Now follows, that you know, young Fortinbras,[114]
    Holding a weak supposal of our worth,
    Or thinking by our late dear brother's death
    Our state to be disjoint and out of frame,                        20
    Colleagued with this dream of his advantage,[115]
    He hath not fail'd to pester us with message,
    Importing the surrender of those lands
    Lost by his father, with all bonds of law,[116]
    To our most valiant brother. So much for him.[117]                25
    Now for ourself, and for this time of meeting:[118]
    Thus much the business is: we have here writ
    To Norway, uncle of young Fortinbras,--
    Who, impotent and bed-rid, scarcely hears[119]
    Of this his nephew's purpose,--to suppress                        30
    His further gait herein; in that the levies,[120]
    The lists and full proportions, are all made
    Out of his subject: and we here dispatch[121]
    You, good Cornelius, and you, Voltimand,[122]
    For bearers of this greeting to old Norway,[123]                  35
    Giving to you no further personal power[124]
    To business with the king more than the scope[124]
    Of these delated articles allow.[125]
    Farewell, and let your haste commend your duty.[126]

    _Cor._} In that and all things will we show our duty.[127]        40
    _Vol._}

    _King._ We doubt it nothing: heartily farewell.[128]

                                      [_Exeunt Voltimand and Cornelius._

    And now, Laertes, what's the news with you?[129]
    You told us of some suit; what is't, Laertes?
    You cannot speak of reason to the Dane,
    And lose your voice: what wouldst thou beg, Laertes,[130]         45
    That shall not be my offer, not thy asking?[131]
    The head is not more native to the heart,[132]
    The hand more instrumental to the mouth,
    Than is the throne of Denmark to thy father.[133]
    What wouldst thou have, Laertes?

    _Laer._                           My dread lord,[134]             50
    Your leave and favour to return to France,
    From whence though willingly I came to Denmark,
    To show my duty in your coronation,
    Yet now, I must confess, that duty done,
    My thoughts and wishes bend again toward France[135]              55
    And bow them to your gracious leave and pardon.

    _King._ Have you your father's leave? What says Polonius?[136]

    _Pol._ He hath, my lord, wrung from me my slow leave[137][138][139]
    By laboursome petition, and at last[138][139][140]
    Upon his will I seal'd my hard consent:[139]                      60
    I do beseech you, give him leave to go.

    _King._ Take thy fair hour, Laertes; time be thine,[141]
    And thy best graces spend it at thy will![141][142]
    But now, my cousin Hamlet, and my son,--[143]

    _Ham._ [_Aside_] A little more than kin, and less than kind.[144]  65

    _King._ How is it that the clouds still hang on you?

    _Ham._ Not so, my lord; I am too much i' the sun.[145]

    _Queen_ Good Hamlet, cast thy nighted colour off,[146]
    And let thine eye look like a friend on Denmark.
    Do not for ever with thy vailed lids[147]                         70
    Seek for thy noble father in the dust:
    Thou know'st 'tis common; all that lives must die,[148]
    Passing through nature to eternity.

    _Ham._ Ay, madam, it is common.

    _Queen._                        If it be,
    Why seems it so particular with thee?                             75

    _Ham._ Seems, madam! nay, it is; I know not 'seems.'
    'Tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother,[149]
    Nor customary suits of solemn black,
    Nor windy suspiration of forced breath,
    No, nor the fruitful river in the eye,                            80
    Nor the dejected haviour of the visage,
    Together with all forms, moods, shapes of grief,[150]
    That can denote me truly: these indeed seem,[151]
    For they are actions that a man might play:
    But I have that within which passes show;[152]                    85
    These but the trappings and the suits of woe.

    _King._ 'Tis sweet and commendable in your nature, Hamlet,[153]
    To give these mourning duties to your father:
    But, you must know, your father lost a father,
    That father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound[154]           90
    In filial obligation for some term
    To do obsequious sorrow: but to persever[155]
    In obstinate condolement is a course[156]
    Of impious stubbornness; 'tis unmanly grief:[156][157]
    It shows a will most incorrect to heaven,                         95
    A heart unfortified, a mind impatient,[158]
    An understanding simple and unschool'd:
    For what we know must be and is as common
    As any the most vulgar thing to sense,
    Why should we in our peevish opposition                          100
    Take it to heart? Fie! 'tis a fault to heaven,
    A fault against the dead, a fault to nature,
    To reason most absurd, whose common theme[159]
    Is death of fathers, and who still hath cried,
    From the first corse till he that died to-day,[160]              105
    'This must be so.' We pray you, throw to earth
    This unprevailing woe, and think of us[161]
    As of a father: for let the world take note,[162]
    You are the most immediate to our throne,
    And with no less nobility of love[163][164]                      110
    Than that which dearest father bears his son[164]
    Do I impart toward you. For your intent[164][165]
    In going back to school in Wittenberg,[166]
    It is most retrograde to our desire:[167]
    And we beseech you, bend you to remain[168]                      115
    Here in the cheer and comfort of our eye,
    Our chiefest courtier, cousin and our son.

    _Queen._ Let not thy mother lose her prayers, Hamlet:[169]
    I pray thee, stay with us; go not to Wittenberg.[170]

    _Ham._ I shall in all my best obey you, madam.[171]              120

    _King._ Why, 'tis a loving and a fair reply:[172]
    Be as ourself in Denmark. Madam, come;
    This gentle and unforced accord of Hamlet
    Sits smiling to my heart: in grace whereof,[173]
    No jocund health that Denmark drinks to-day,                     125
    But the great cannon to the clouds shall tell,[174]
    And the king's rouse the heaven shall bruit again,[175]
    Re-speaking earthly thunder. Come away.[176]

                                     [_Flourish. Exeunt all but Hamlet._

    _Ham._ O, that this too too solid flesh would melt,[177]
    Thaw and resolve itself into a dew!                              130
    Or that the Everlasting had not fix'd
    His canon 'gainst self-slaughter! O God! God![178]
    How weary, stale, flat and unprofitable[179]
    Seem to me all the uses of this world![180]
    Fie on't! ah fie! 'tis an unweeded garden,[181]                  135
    That grows to seed; things rank and gross in nature
    Possess it merely. That it should come to this![182]
    But two months dead! nay, not so much, not two:
    So excellent a king; that was, to this,[183]
    Hyperion to a satyr: so loving to my mother,[183][184]           140
    That he might not beteem the winds of heaven[185]
    Visit her face too roughly. Heaven and earth![186]
    Must I remember? why, she would hang on him,[186][187]
    As if increase of appetite had grown
    By what it fed on: and yet, within a month--[188]                145
    Let me not think on't--Frailty, thy name is woman!--[189]
    A little month, or ere those shoes were old[190]
    With which she follow'd my poor father's body,[191]
    Like Niobe, all tears:--why she, even she,--[192]
    O God! a beast, that wants discourse of reason,[193]             150
    Would have mourn'd longer,--married with my uncle,[194]
    My father's brother, but no more like my father[195]
    Than I to Hercules: within a month;
    Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears[196]
    Had left the flushing in her galled eyes,[197]                   155
    She married. O, most wicked speed, to post
    With such dexterity to incestuous sheets![198]
    It is not, nor it cannot come to good:
    But break, my heart, for I must hold my tongue![199]

              _Enter_ HORATIO, MARCELLUS, _and_ BERNARDO.

    _Hor._ Hail to your lordship!

    _Ham._                     I am glad to see you well:[200][201]  160
    Horatio,--or I do forget myself.[201][202]

    _Hor._ The same, my lord, and your poor servant ever.[203]

    _Ham._ Sir, my good friend; I'll change that name with you:[204]
    And what make you from Wittenberg, Horatio?
    Marcellus?[205]                                                  165

    _Mar._ My good lord?[206]

    _Ham._ I am very glad to see you. [_To Ber._] Good even, sir.[207]
    But what, in faith, make you from Wittenberg?[208]

    _Hor._ A truant disposition, good my lord.[209]

    _Ham._ I would not hear your enemy say so,[210]                  170
    Nor shall you do my ear that violence,[211]
    To make it truster of your own report[212]
    Against yourself: I know you are no truant.
    But what is your affair in Elsinore?[213]
    We'll teach you to drink deep ere you depart.[214]               175

    _Hor._ My lord, I came to see your father's funeral.

    _Ham._ I prethee, do not mock me, fellow-student;[215]
    I think it was to see my mother's wedding.[216]

    _Hor._ Indeed, my lord, it follow'd hard upon.[217]

    _Ham._ Thrift, thrift, Horatio! the funeral baked-meats          180
    Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables.
    Would I had met my dearest foe in heaven
    Or ever I had seen that day, Horatio![218]
    My father!--methinks I see my father.

    _Hor._ O where, my lord?

    _Ham._                   In my mind's eye, Horatio.[219]         185

    _Hor._ I saw him once; he was a goodly king.[220]

    _Ham._ He was a man, take him for all in all,[220][221]
    I shall not look upon his like again.[222]

    _Hor._ My lord, I think I saw him yesternight.

    _Ham._ Saw? Who?[223]                                            190

    _Hor._ My lord, the king your father.

    _Ham._                                The king my father!

    _Hor._ Season your admiration for a while[224]
    With an attent ear, till I may deliver,[225]
    Upon the witness of these gentlemen,
    This marvel to you.

    _Ham._              For God's love, let me hear.[226]            195

    _Hor._ Two nights together had these gentlemen,
    Marcellus and Bernardo, on their watch,
    In the dead vast and middle of the night,[227]
    Been thus encounter'd. A figure like your father,
    Armed at point exactly, cap-a-pe,[228]                           200
    Appears before them, and with solemn march
    Goes slow and stately by them: thrice he walk'd[229]
    By their oppress'd and fear-surprised eyes,[230]
    Within his truncheon's length; whilst they, distill'd[231]
    Almost to jelly with the act of fear,[232]                       205
    Stand dumb, and speak not to him. This to me
    In dreadful secrecy impart they did;[233]
    And I with them the third night kept the watch:
    Where, as they had deliver'd, both in time,[234]
    Form of the thing, each word made true and good,                 210
    The apparition comes: I knew your father;[235]
    These hands are not more like.

    _Ham._                         But where was this?

    _Mar._ My lord, upon the platform where we watch'd.

    _Ham._ Did you not speak to it?

    _Hor._                          My lord, I did,[236]
    But answer made it none: yet once methought[237]                 215
    It lifted up its head and did address[238]
    Itself to motion, like as it would speak:[239]
    But even then the morning cock crew loud,
    And at the sound it shrunk in haste away
    And vanish'd from our sight.

    _Ham._                       'Tis very strange.                  220

    _Hor._ As I do live, my honour'd lord, 'tis true,[240]
    And we did think it writ down in our duty[241]
    To let you know of it.[242]

    _Ham._ Indeed, indeed, sirs, but this troubles me.[243]
    Hold you the watch to-night?

    _Mar._ }               We do, my lord.[244]                      225
    _Ber._ }

    _Ham._ Arm'd, say you?

    _Mar._ }              Arm'd, my lord.
    _Ber._ }

    _Ham._                                 From top to toe?[244]

    _Mar._ }  My lord, from head to foot.[244][245][246]
    _Ber._ }

    _Ham._ Then saw you not his face?[246][247]

    _Hor._ O, yes, my lord; he wore his beaver up.[246][248]

    _Ham._ What, look'd he frowningly?[249]                          230

    _Hor._ A countenance more in sorrow than in anger.

    _Ham._ Pale or red?

    _Hor._ Nay, very pale.

    _Ham._                 And fix'd his eyes upon you?

    _Hor._  Most constantly.

    _Ham._                   I would I had been there.

    _Hor._  It would have much amazed you.[250]                      235

    _Ham._  Very like, very like. Stay'd it long?[250][251]

    _Hor._  While one with moderate haste might tell a hundred.[250][252]

    _Mar._}    Longer, longer.[250][253]
    _Ber._}

    _Hor._ Not when I saw't.

    _Ham._                   His beard was grizzled? no?[254][255]

    _Hor._  It was, as I have seen it in his life,[255][256]         240
    A sable silver'd.[257]

    _Ham._            I will watch to-night;
    Perchance 'twill walk again.

    _Hor._                       I warrant it will.[258]

    _Ham._  If it assume my noble father's person,
    I'll speak to it, though hell itself should gape
    And bid me hold my peace. I pray you all,                        245
    If you have hitherto conceal'd this sight,[259]
    Let it be tenable in your silence still,[260]
    And whatsoever else shall hap to-night,[261]
    Give it an understanding, but no tongue:
    I will requite your loves. So fare you well:[262]                250
    Upon the platform, 'twixt eleven and twelve.[263]
    I'll visit you.

    _All._          Our duty to your honour.[264]

    _Ham._ Your loves, as mine to you: farewell.[265]

                                               [_Exeunt all but Hamlet._

    My father's spirit in arms! all is not well;[266]
    I doubt some foul play: would the night were come!               255
    Till then sit still, my soul: foul deeds will rise,[267]
    Though all the earth o'erwhelm them, to men's eyes.         [_Exit._


SCENE III. _A room in Polonius's house._

                  _Enter_ LAERTES _and_ OPHELIA.[268]

    _Laer._ My necessaries are embark'd: farewell:[269]
    And, sister, as the winds give benefit
    And convoy is assistant, do not sleep,[270]
    But let me hear from you.

    _Oph._                    Do you doubt that?

    _Laer._ For Hamlet, and the trifling of his favour,[271]           5
    Hold it a fashion, and a toy in blood,
    A violet in the youth of primy nature,[272]
    Forward, not permanent, sweet, not lasting,[273]
    The perfume and suppliance of a minute;[274]
    No more.

    _Oph._   No more but so?

    _Laer._                  Think it no more:[275]                   10
    For nature crescent does not grow alone[276]
    In thews and bulk; but, as this temple waxes,[277]
    The inward service of the mind and soul[278]
    Grows wide withal. Perhaps he loves you now;
    And now no soil nor cautel doth besmirch[279]                     15
    The virtue of his will: but you must fear,[280]
    His greatness weigh'd, his will is not his own;[281]
    For he himself is subject to his birth:[282]
    He may not, as unvalued persons do,[283]
    Carve for himself, for on his choice depends[284]                 20
    The safety and health of this whole state,[285]
    And therefore must his choice be circumscribed
    Unto the voice and yielding of that body
    Whereof he is the head. Then if he says he loves you,[286]
    It fits your wisdom so far to believe it                          25
    As he in his particular act and place[287]
    May give his saying deed; which is no further
    Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal.
    Then weigh what loss your honour may sustain,[288]
    If with too credent ear you list his songs,[289]                  30
    Or lose your heart, or your chaste treasure open[290]
    To his unmaster'd importunity.[291]
    Fear it, Ophelia, fear it, my dear sister,
    And keep you in the rear of your affection,[292]
    Out of the shot and danger of desire.                             35
    The chariest maid is prodigal enough,
    If she unmask her beauty to the moon:
    Virtue itself 'scapes not calumnious strokes:
    The canker galls the infants of the spring[293]
    Too oft before their buttons be disclosed,[294]                   40
    And in the morn and liquid dew of youth
    Contagious blastments are most imminent.
    Be wary then; best safety lies in fear:
    Youth to itself rebels, though none else near.

    _Oph._ I shall the effect of this good lesson keep,[295]          45
    As watchman to my heart. But, good my brother,[296]
    Do not, as some ungracious pastors do,
    Show me the steep and thorny way to heaven,[297]
    Whilst, like a puff'd and reckless libertine,[298]
    Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads[299]                50
    And recks not his own rede.[300]

    _Laer._                     O, fear me not.
    I stay too long: but here my father comes.

                         _Enter_ POLONIUS.[301]

    A double blessing is a double grace;[302]
    Occasion smiles upon a second leave.

    _Pol._ Yet here, Laertes! Aboard, aboard, for shame![303]         55
    The wind sits in the shoulder of your sail,
    And you are stay'd for. There; my blessing with thee![304]
    And these few precepts in thy memory
    Look thou character. Give thy thoughts no tongue,[305]
    Nor any unproportion'd thought his act.                           60
    Be thou familiar, but by no means vulgar.
    Those friends thou hast, and their adoption tried,[306]
    Grapple them to thy soul with hoops of steel,[307]
    But do not dull thy palm with entertainment[308]
    Of each new-hatch'd, unfledged comrade. Beware[309]               65
    Of entrance to a quarrel; but being in,
    Bear't, that th' opposed may beware of thee.[310]
    Give every man thy ear, but few thy voice:[311]
    Take each man's censure, but reserve thy judgement.
    Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy,                            70
    But not express'd in fancy; rich, not gaudy:
    For the apparel oft proclaims the man;
    And they in France of the best rank and station
    Are of a most select and generous chief in that.[312]
    Neither a borrower nor a lender be:[313]                          75
    For loan oft loses both itself and friend,[314]
    And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.[315]
    This above all: to thine own self be true,
    And it must follow, as the night the day,[316]
    Thou canst not then be false to any man.                          80
    Farewell: my blessing season this in thee![317]

    _Laer._  Most humbly do I take my leave, my lord.[318]

    _Pol._  The time invites you; go, your servants tend.[319]

    _Laer._  Farewell, Ophelia, and remember well
    What I have said to you.

    _Oph._       'Tis in my memory lock'd,[320]                       85
    And you yourself shall keep the key of it.

    _Laer._  Farewell.                                     [_Exit._[321]

    _Pol._  What is't, Ophelia, he hath said to you?[322]

    _Oph._  So please you, something touching the Lord Hamlet.[323]

    _Pol._  Marry, well bethought:                                    90
    'Tis told me, he hath very oft of late
    Given private time to you, and you yourself
    Have of your audience been most free and bounteous:
    If it be so--as so 'tis put on me,
    And that in way of caution--I must tell you,                      95
    You do not understand yourself so clearly
    As it behoves my daughter and your honour.
    What is between you? give me up the truth.[324]

    _Oph._  He hath, my lord, of late made many tenders
    Of his affection to me.                                          100

    _Pol._  Affection! pooh! you speak like a green girl,[325]
    Unsifted in such perilous circumstance.[326]
    Do you believe his tenders, as you call them?

    _Oph._  I do not know, my lord, what I should think.

    _Pol._  Marry, I'll teach you: think yourself a baby,[327]       105
    That you have ta'en these tenders for true pay,[328]
    Which are not sterling. Tender yourself more dearly;[329]
    Or--not to crack the wind of the poor phrase,
    Running it thus--you'll tender me a fool.[330]

    _Oph._  My lord, he hath importuned me with love                 110
    In honourable fashion.

    _Pol._  Ay, fashion you may call it; go to, go to.[331]

    _Oph._ And hath given countenance to his speech, my lord,[332][333]
    With almost all the holy vows of heaven.[332][334]

    _Pol._  Ay, springes to catch woodcocks. I do know,[335]         115
    When the blood burns, how prodigal the soul[336]
    Lends the tongue vows: these blazes, daughter,[337]
    Giving more light than heat, extinct in both,[338]
    Even in their promise, as it is a-making,[339]
    You must not take for fire. From this time[340]                  120
    Be something scanter of your maiden presence;[341]
    Set your entreatments at a higher rate[342]
    Than a command to parley. For Lord Hamlet,[343]
    Believe so much in him, that he is young,
    And with a larger tether may he walk[344]                        125
    Than may be given you: in few, Ophelia,
    Do not believe his vows; for they are brokers,
    Not of that dye which their investments show,[345]
    But mere implorators of unholy suits,[346]
    Breathing like sanctified and pious bawds,[347]                  130
    The better to beguile. This is for all:[348]
    I would not, in plain terms, from this time forth,
    Have you so slander any moment leisure,[349]
    As to give words or talk with the Lord Hamlet.
    Look to't, I charge you: come your ways.[350]                    135

    _Oph._ I shall obey, my lord.                        [_Exeunt._[351]


SCENE IV. _The platform._[352]

               _Enter_ HAMLET, HORATIO, _and_ MARCELLUS.

    _Ham._ The air bites shrewdly; it is very cold.[353]

    _Hor._ It is a nipping and an eager air.[354]

    _Ham._ What hour now?

    _Hor._                I think it lacks of twelve.

    _Mar._ No, it is struck.[355]

    _Hor._ Indeed? I heard it not: it then draws near the season[356]  5
    Wherein the spirit held his wont to walk.

           [_A flourish of trumpets, and ordnance shot off within._[357]

    What does this mean, my lord?[358]

    _Ham._  The king doth wake to-night and takes his rouse,[359]
    Keeps wassail, and the swaggering up-spring reels;[360]
    And as he drains his draughts of Rhenish down,[361]               10
    The kettle-drum and trumpet thus bray out[362]
    The triumph of his pledge.

    _Hor._                     Is it a custom?[363]

    _Ham._  Ay, marry, is't:[364]
    But to my mind, though I am native here[365]
    And to the manner born, it is a custom                            15
    More honour'd in the breach than the observance.
    This heavy-headed revel east and west[366][367][368][369]
    Makes us traduced and tax'd of other nations:[366][367][369][370]
    They clepe us drunkards, and with swinish phrase[366][367][371]
    Soil our addition; and indeed it takes[366][367]                  20
    From our achievements, though perform'd at height,[366][367]
    The pith and marrow of our attribute.[366][367]
    So, oft it chances in particular men,[366][367][372]
    That for some vicious mole of nature in them,[366][367][373]
    As, in their birth,--wherein they are not guilty,[366][367]       25
    Since nature cannot choose his origin,--[366][367]
    By the o'ergrowth of some complexion,[366][367][374]
    Oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason,[366][367]
    Or by some habit that too much o'er-leavens[366][367]
    The form of plausive manners, that these men,--[366][367]         30
    Carrying, I say, the stamp of one defect,[366][367]
    Being nature's livery, or fortune's star,--[366][367][375]
    Their virtues else--be they as pure as grace,[366][367][376]
    As infinite as man may undergo--[366][367]
    Shall in the general censure take corruption[366][367]            35
    From that particular fault: the dram of eale[366][367][377][378]
    Doth all the noble substance of a doubt[367][377][378]
    To his own scandal.[367][377][379]

                             _Enter Ghost._

    _Hor._              Look, my lord, it comes![380]

    _Ham._ Angels and ministers of grace defend us![381]
    Be thou a spirit of health or goblin damn'd,                      40
    Bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts from hell,
    Be thy intents wicked or charitable,[382]
    Thou comest in such a questionable shape[383]
    That I will speak to thee: I'll call thee Hamlet,
    King, father, royal Dane: O, answer me![384]                      45
    Let me not burst in ignorance; but tell[385]
    Why thy canonized bones, hearsed in death,[385][386]
    Have burst their cerements; why the sepulchre,[387]
    Wherein we saw thee quietly inurn'd,[388]
    Hath oped his ponderous and marble jaws,                          50
    To cast thee up again. What may this mean,
    That thou, dead corse, again, in complete steel,
    Revisit'st thus the glimpses of the moon,[389]
    Making night hideous; and we fools of nature[390]
    So horridly to shake our disposition[391]                         55
    With thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls?[392]
    Say, why is this? wherefore? what should we do?[393]

                                                [_Ghost beckons Hamlet._

    _Hor._  It beckons you to go away with it,
    As if it some impartment did desire
    To you alone.

    _Mar._        Look, with what courteous action                    60
    It waves you to a more removed ground:[394]
    But do not go with it.

    _Hor._                 No, by no means.[395]

    _Ham._  It will not speak; then I will follow it.[396]

    _Hor._  Do not, my lord.

    _Ham._                   Why, what should be the fear?[397]
    I do not set my life at a pin's fee;[398]                         65
    And for my soul, what can it do to that,
    Being a thing immortal as itself?[399]
    It waves me forth again: I'll follow it.

    _Hor._  What if it tempt you toward the flood, my lord,[400]
    Or to the dreadful summit of the cliff[401]                       70
    That beetles o'er his base into the sea,[402]
    And there assume some other horrible form,[403]
    Which might deprive your sovereignty of reason[404]
    And draw you into madness? think of it:[405]
    The very place puts toys of desperation,[406]                     75
    Without more motive, into every brain[406]
    That looks so many fathoms to the sea[406]
    And hears it roar beneath.[406][407][408]

    _Ham._                     It waves me still.[407]
    Go on; I'll follow thee.

    _Mar._ You shall not go, my lord.

    _Ham._                            Hold off your hands.[409]       80

    _Hor._ Be ruled; you shall not go.

    _Ham._                             My fate cries out,[410]
    And makes each petty artery in this body[411]
    As hardy as the Nemean lion's nerve.[412]
    Still am I call'd: unhand me, gentlemen;[413]
    By heaven, I'll make a ghost of him that lets me:                 85
    I say, away! Go on; I'll follow thee.

                                        [_Exeunt Ghost and Hamlet._[414]

    _Hor._  He waxes desperate with imagination.[415]

    _Mar._  Let's follow; 'tis not fit thus to obey him.

    _Hor._  Have after. To what issue will this come?

    _Mar._  Something is rotten in the state of Denmark.              90

    _Hor._  Heaven will direct it.

    _Mar._                  Nay, let's follow him.       [_Exeunt._[416]


SCENE V. _Another part of the platform._

                    _Enter_ Ghost _and_ HAMLET.[417]

    _Ham._  Whither wilt thou lead me? speak; I'll go no further.[418]

    _Ghost._  Mark me.

    _Ham._             I will.

    _Ghost._                  My hour is almost come,
    When I to sulphurous and tormenting flames[419]
    Must render up myself.

    _Ham._                 Alas, poor ghost!

    _Ghost._ Pity me not, but lend thy serious hearing[420][421]       5
    To what I shall unfold.[420]

    _Ham._                  Speak; I am bound to hear.[422]

    _Ghost._ So art thou to revenge, when thou shalt hear.[423]

    _Ham._ What?[424]

    _Ghost._ I am thy father's spirit;
    Doom'd for a certain term to walk the night,                      10
    And for the day confined to fast in fires,[425]
    Till the foul crimes done in my days of nature
    Are burnt and purged away. But that I am forbid[426]
    To tell the secrets of my prison-house,
    I could a tale unfold whose lightest word                         15
    Would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood,
    Make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their spheres,
    Thy knotted and combined locks to part[427]
    And each particular hair to stand an end,[428]
    Like quills upon the fretful porpentine:[429]                     20
    But this eternal blazon must not be
    To ears of flesh and blood. List, list, O, list![430]
    If thou didst ever thy dear father love--[431]

    _Ham._ O God![432]

    _Ghost._ Revenge his foul and most unnatural murder.              25

    _Ham._ Murder![433]

    _Ghost._ Murder most foul, as in the best it is,[434]
    But this most foul, strange, and unnatural.

    _Ham._ Haste me to know't, that I, with wings as swift[435]
    As meditation or the thoughts of love,[436]                       30
    May sweep to my revenge.[437]

    _Ghost._                 I find thee apt;
    And duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed[438][439]
    That roots itself in ease on Lethe wharf,[440]
    Wouldst thou not stir in this. Now, Hamlet, hear:[440]
    'Tis given out that, sleeping in my orchard,[441]                 35
    A serpent stung me; so the whole ear of Denmark[442]
    Is by a forged process of my death
    Rankly abused: but know, thou noble youth,[443]
    The serpent that did sting thy father's life[444]
    Now wears his crown.

    _Ham._               O my prophetic soul![445]                    40
    My uncle![445][446]

    _Ghost._ Ay, that incestuous, that adulterate beast,[447]
    With witchcraft of his wit, with traitorous gifts,--[448]
    O wicked wit and gifts, that have the power[449]
    So to seduce!--won to his shameful lust[450]                      45
    The will of my most seeming-virtuous queen:[451]
    O Hamlet, what a falling-off was there![452]
    From me, whose love was of that dignity
    That it went hand in hand even with the vow
    I made to her in marriage; and to decline[453]                    50
    Upon a wretch, whose natural gifts were poor
    To those of mine![454][455]
    But virtue, as it never will be moved,[454]
    Though lewdness court it in a shape of heaven,
    So lust, though to a radiant angel link'd,[456]                   55
    Will sate itself in a celestial bed[457][458]
    And prey on garbage.[457][459]
    But, soft! methinks I scent the morning air;[460]
    Brief let me be. Sleeping within my orchard,[461]
    My custom always of the afternoon,[462]                           60
    Upon my secure hour thy uncle stole,[463]
    With juice of cursed hebenon in a vial,[464]
    And in the porches of my ears did pour[465]
    The leperous distilment; whose effect[466]
    Holds such an enmity with blood of man[466]                       65
    That swift as quicksilver it courses through
    The natural gates and alleys of the body;[467]
    And with a sudden vigour it doth posset[468]
    And curd, like eager droppings into milk,[469]
    The thin and wholesome blood: so did it mine;                     70
    And a most instant tetter bark'd about,[470]
    Most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust,
    All my smooth body.
    Thus was I, sleeping, by a brother's hand
    Of life, of crown, of queen, at once dispatch'd:[471]             75
    Cut off even in the blossoms of my sin,[472]
    Unhousel'd, disappointed, unanel'd;[473]
    No reckoning made, but sent to my account
    With all my imperfections on my head:[474]
    O, horrible! O, horrible! most horrible![475]                     80
    If thou hast nature in thee, bear it not;
    Let not the royal bed of Denmark be
    A couch for luxury and damned incest.
    But, howsoever thou pursuest this act,[476]
    Taint not thy mind, nor let thy soul contrive[477]                85
    Against thy mother aught: leave her to heaven,
    And to those thorns that in her bosom lodge,
    To prick and sting her. Fare thee well at once!
    The glow-worm shows the matin to be near,[478]
    And 'gins to pale his uneffectual fire:                           90
    Adieu, adieu, adieu! remember me.                      [_Exit._[479]

    _Ham._  O all you host of heaven! O earth! what else?
    And shall I couple hell? O, fie! Hold, hold, my heart;[480]
    And you, my sinews, grow not instant old,
    But bear me stiffly up. Remember thee![481][482]                  95
    Ay, thou poor ghost, while memory holds a seat[483]
    In this distracted globe. Remember thee![482]
    Yea, from the table of my memory
    I'll wipe away all trivial fond records,
    All saws of books, all forms, all pressures past,[484]           100
    That youth and observation copied there;
    And thy commandment all alone shall live
    Within the book and volume of my brain,
    Unmix'd with baser matter: yes, by heaven![485]
    O most pernicious woman![486]                                    105
    0 villain, villain, smiling, damned villain!
    My tables,--meet it is I set it down,[487][488]
    That one may smile, and smile, and be a villain;[488]
    At least I'm sure it may be so in Denmark.     [_Writing._[488][489]
    So, uncle, there you are. Now to my word;[488]                   110
    It is 'Adieu, adieu! remember me.'[488][490][491]
    I have sworn't.[488][490][492]

    _Hor._} [_Within_] My lord, my lord!
    _Mar._}

                 _Enter_ HORATIO _and_ MARCELLUS.[493]

    _Mar._                               Lord Hamlet!

    _Hor._                                       Heaven secure him![494]

    _Ham._ So be it![495]

    _Mar._ Illo, ho, ho, my lord![496]                               115

    _Ham._ Hillo, ho, ho, boy! come, bird, come.[497]

    _Mar._ How is't, my noble lord?

    _Hor._                          What news, my lord?[498]

    _Ham._ O, wonderful![499]

    _Hor._ Good my lord, tell it.

    _Ham._                        No; you will reveal it.[500]

    _Hor._ Not I, my lord, by heaven.

    _Mar._                            Nor I, my lord.                120

    _Ham._ How say you, then; would heart of man once think it?[501]
    But you'll be secret?[502]

    _Hor._}               Ay, by heaven, my lord.
    _Mar._}

    _Ham._ There's ne'er a villain dwelling in all Denmark[503][504]
    But he's an arrant knave.[504][505]

    _Hor._ There needs no ghost, my lord, come from the grave[506]   125
    To tell us this.[506][507]

    _Ham._           Why, right; you are i' the right;
    And so, without more circumstance at all,
    I hold it fit that we shake hands and part:
    You, as your business and desire shall point you;[508]
    For every man hath business and desire,[509]                     130
    Such as it is; and for my own poor part,[510]
    Look you, I'll go pray.[511]

    _Hor._ These are but wild and whirling words, my lord.[512]

    _Ham._ I'm sorry they offend you, heartily;[513]
    Yes, faith, heartily.[514]

    _Hor._                There's no offence, my lord.               135

    _Ham._ Yes, by Saint Patrick, but there is, Horatio,[515]
    And much offence too. Touching this vision here,[516]
    It is an honest ghost, that let me tell you:
    For your desire to know what is between us,
    O'ermaster't as you may. And now, good friends,[517]             140
    As you are friends, scholars and soldiers,
    Give me one poor request.

    _Hor._ What is't, my lord? we will.[518]

    _Ham._ Never make known what you have seen to-night.

    _Hor._}
    _Mar._} My lord, we will not.

    _Ham._                        Nay, but swear't.

    _Hor._                                      In faith,[519][520]  145
    My lord, not I.[520]

    _Mar._          Nor I, my lord, in faith.

    _Ham._ Upon my sword.

    _Mar._                We have sworn, my lord, already.[521]

    _Ham._ Indeed, upon my sword, indeed.[522]

    _Ghost._ [_Beneath_] Swear.[523]

    _Ham._ Ah, ha, boy! say'st thou so? art thou there,
        true-penny?[524][525]                                        150
    Come on: you hear this fellow in the cellarage:[524][526]
    Consent to swear.

    _Hor._            Propose the oath, my lord.[527]

    _Ham._ Never to speak of this that you have seen,[528]
    Swear by my sword.

    _Ghost._ [_Beneath_] Swear.[529]                                 155

    _Ham._  Hic et ubique? then we'll shift our ground.[530]
    Come hither, gentlemen,[531]
    And lay your hands again upon my sword:[531]
    Never to speak of this that you have heard,[531][532]
    Swear by my sword.[531]                                          160

    _Ghost._ [_Beneath_] Swear.[529][533]

    _Ham._ Well said, old mole! canst work i' the earth so fast?[534]
    A worthy pioner! Once more remove, good friends.[535]

    _Hor._ O day and night, but this is wondrous strange!

    _Ham._ And therefore as a stranger give it welcome.[536]         165
    There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio,
    Than are dreamt of in your philosophy.[537][538]
    But come;[538][539]
    Here, as before, never, so help you mercy,[539][540]
    How strange or odd soe'er I bear myself,[541][542][543]          170
    As I perchance hereafter shall think meet[541][542][544][545]
    To put an antic disposition on,[541][542][544]
    That you, at such times seeing me, never shall,[542][546]
    With arms encumber'd thus, or this head-shake,[542][547]
    Or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase,[542][548]             175
    As 'Well, well, we know,' or 'We could, an if we would,'[542][549][550]
    Or 'If we list to speak,' or 'There be, an if they might,'[542][550][551]
    Or such ambiguous giving out, to note[542][552]
    That you know aught of me: this not to do,[553]
    So grace and mercy at your most need help you,[553]              180
    Swear.[553]

    _Ghost._ [_Beneath_] Swear.[529]

    _Ham._  Rest, rest, perturbed spirit!  [_They swear._] So,
              gentlemen,[554]
    With all my love I do commend me to you:[555]
    And what so poor a man as Hamlet is                              185
    May do, to express his love and friending to you,[556]
    God willing, shall not lack. Let us go in together;[557]
    And still your fingers on your lips, I pray.[558]
    The time is out of joint: O cursed spite,
    That ever I was born to set it right![559]                       190
    Nay, come, let's go together.                             [_Exeunt._

FOOTNOTES:

[1] ACT I. SCENE I.] Actus Primus. Scæna prima. Ff. Omitted in Qq. See
note [I]

Elsinore.] Capell.

A platform ...] Malone. An open Place before the Palace. Rowe. A
Platform before the Palace. Theobald. Platform of the Castle. Capell.

Francisco at ...] Francisco upon ... Capell. Enter Barnardo, and
Francisco, two Centinels. Qq Ff.

[2] _Who's_] Ff Q₆. _Whose_ The rest.

[3] _Who's ... He_] As in Qq Ff. Two lines of verse in Capell, the
first ending _unfold_.

[4] _Bernardo?_] _Barnardo?_ F₁ F₂ Q₆ F₃. _Barnardo._ The rest.

[5] _carefully_] _chearfully_ F₃ F₄.

[6] _now struck_] _new-struck_ Elze (Steevens conj.)

_struck_] _strooke_ Qq. _strook_ F₁.

[7] _Well, ... haste._] As in Qq. Prose in Ff.

[8] _Horatio ... rivals_] _Horatio, and Marcellus The rival_ Warner
conj.

[9] _ho_] Qq. om. Ff.

_Who is_] Qq. _who's_ Ff.

Enter ...] Qq Ff (after line 13).

[10] _Give you_] om. Q (1676).

[11] _O, farewell ... night._] Arranged as by Capell. Two lines in Qq
Ff.

[12] _soldier_] Ff. _souldiers_ Qq.

[13] _Who hath_] _Who has_ Q (1676).

_hath my_] Qq. _ha's my_ F₁ F₂ _has my_ F₃ F₄.

[14] [Exit.] Exit Fran. Qq F₁. Exit Francisco. F₂ F₃ F₄.

_Say,_] _Say._ Knight.

[15] _Say, ... there?_] As in Capell. One line in Qq Ff.

[16] [Giving his hand. Warburton.

[17] Mar.] (Q₁) Ff. Hora. Qq.

_What, has_] Q₂ Q₃ Ff Q₆. _What has_ Q₄ Q₅.

_to-night?_] _to night?_ Qq. _to night._ Ff.

[18] _our_] _a_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

[19] _sight_] _spright_ Warburton conj.

[20] _along With us to_] _along, With us to_ Qq. _along With us, to_ Ff.

[21] _Tush, tush,_] om. Q (1676).

[22] _story, What ... seen._] _story._ Mar. _What ... seen--_Hanmer.

[23] _have two nights_] (Q₁) Qq. _two nights have_ Ff.

_sit we_] _let's_ Q (1676).

[24] _yond_] _yon_ F₃ F₄.

[25] _to illume_] _t' illume_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Ff. _t' illumin_ Q₅. _t'
illumine_ Q₆. _to Illumine_ (Q₁). _to enlighten_ Q (1676).

[26] _beating_] _towling_ (Q₁). _tolling_ Collier MS. See note (II).

_one,--_] _one--_ Rowe. _one._ Qq Ff.

[Castle-bell tolls one. Ingleby conj.

Enter Ghost.] Qq. Enter the Ghost. Ff, after _off;_ line 40. Enter the
Ghost armed. Collier MS.

[27] _Peace ... again!_] As in Qq. Two lines in Ff.

_off_] _of_ Q₂ Q₃ F₁ (Capell's copy).

[28] Ber. _Looks ... Horatio._] Omitted in Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

_Looks it_] _Lookes a_ Q₂ Q₃. _Looke it_ F₂.

[29] _harrows_] F₃ F₄. _horrowes_ Qq. _harrowes_ F₁ F₂. _horrors_ (Q₁).
_startles_ Q (1676).

[30] _Question_] (Q₁) Ff. _Speake to_ Qq.

[31] _usurp'st_] _usurpest_ Q (1676).

[32] _march?_] Q₆. _march,_ Q₂ Q₃. _march:_ The rest.

_by heaven_] om. Q (1676).

_thee,_] Rowe. _thee_ Qq Ff.

[33] _speak, speak!_] _speak;_ Pope.

[Exit Ghost.] Qq. Exit the Ghost. Ff.

[34] _on't_] _of it_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

[35] _Before ... believe_] _I could not believe this_ Q (1676).

_not_] _nor_ F₂.

[36] _true_] _try'd_ Warburton.

[37] _very_] om. F₂ F₃ F₄.

[38] _he_] om. Ff.

[39] _smote_] _smot_ Q₂ Q₃ F₁ F₂ F₃.

_sledded_] Ff. _sleaded_ (Q₁) Qq. _sturdy_ Leo conj.

_Polacks_] Malone. _pollax_ (Q₁)Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _Pollax_ Q₅ F₁ F₂ Q₆.
_Polax_ F₃. _Pole-axe_ F₄. _Pole-axe_ Rowe. _Polack_ Pope.

[40] _'Tis strange._] _'Tis strange--_ Rowe. om. Seymour conj.

[41] _jump_] (Q₁) Qq. _just_ Ff.

_jump at this dead_] _at the same_ Q (1676).

_dead_] _same_ F₂ Q₆ F₃ F₄. _dread_ Anon. conj.

[42] _hath he gone by_] _he passed throught_ (Q₁) Staunton.

[43] _thought to_] _it_ Collier MS. See note(II).

[44] _gross and_] om. Q (1676).

_my_] (Q₁) Ff. _mine_ Qq.

[45] _Good now,_] _Pray_ Q (1676).

[46] _subject_] _subjects_ Pope.

[47] _why_] (Q₁) Ff. _with_ Qq.

_cast_] _cost_ (Q₁) Qq.

[48] _Does_] _Dos't_ F₃ F₄.

[49] _Doth make_] _Makes_ Q (1676).

_joint-labourer_] _joint labour_ Q₅ Q₆.

[50] _emulate_] _emulant_ Seymour conj.

[51] _combat_] _fight_ Pope.

[52] _a_] om. Pope.

[53] _and_] _of_ Hanmer (Warburton).

_heraldry_] _heraldy_ Q₂ Q₃.

[54] _those_] Ff. _these_ Qq.

[55] _of_] Qq. _on_ Ff. _in_ Collier MS. See note (II).

[56] _return'd_] Ff. _returne_ Qq. _remain'd_ Collier MS. See note (II).

[57] _vanquisher;_] Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _vanquisher,_ Ff. _vanquisht;_ Q₆.

_the same_] _that_ Pope.

_covenant_] _Cov'nant_ Ff. _comart_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _co-mart_ Q₆.
_compact_ Q (1676).

[58] _article design'd_] F₂ F₃ F₄. _article desseigne_ Q₂ Q₃. _articles
deseigne_ Q₄. _Articles designe_ Q₅ Q₆. _Article designe_ F₁. _articles
design'd_ Pope. _article then sign'd_ Collier MS. See note (II).

[59] _sir_] om. Pope

[60] _unimproved_] _inapproved_ (Q₁) Collier conj. _unapproved_ Anon.
conj.

_mettle_] _metall_ Q₆.

[61] _lawless_] _lawelesse_ Q₂ Q₃. _lawlesse_ (Q₁) Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.
_landlesse_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _landless_ F₄.

[62] _lawless ... diet, to_] _landless resolutes, For food; and dieted
to_ Theobald conj. (withdrawn).

[63] _is_] om. Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

[64] _As_] Qq. _And_ Ff.

[65] _compulsatory_] Qq. _compulsative_ Ff.

[66] Ber. _I think ... countrymen._] Qq. Omitted in Ff.

[67] _e'en so_] _enso_ Q₂ Q₃. _even so_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

[68] _mote_] Q₅ Q₆. _moth_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄.

[69] _palmy_] _flourishing_ Q (1676) and Rowe.

_state_] _State_ (i.e. _city_) Wilson conj.

[70] _tenantless_] _tennatlesse_ Q₂ Q₃.

_and_] om. Pope.

[71] _streets: ..._] Omission first marked by Jennens, who suggests
_Tremendous prodigies in heaven appear'd._ Boaden proposes _The heavens
too spoke in silent prodigies._ Hunter suggests _In the heavens above
strange portents did appear._ Becket would transfer line 123 _And
prologue ... on to follow streets:_ line 116.

[72] _As ... blood,_] _Stars shon with trains of fire, dews of blood
fell,_ Rowe. Omitted by Rann. Transferred by Mitford to follow
_events,_ line 121.

_and dews_] _shed dews_ Harness, reading _Disasters dimm'd_ in line 118.

[73] _As stars with ... Disasters in_] _Astres with ... Disasterous
dimm'd_ Malone conj. _Disastrous ... Disasters in_ Becket conj. _A star
with ... Disasters in_ Jackson conj. _As stars with ... Did usher in_
Duane conj. _As stars with ... Disastering_ Anon. apud Singer (ed. 2)
conj. _Astres with ... Did overcast_ Williams conj. _Ay, stars
with ... Did darken e'en_ or _Ay, stars with ... Did enter in_ or _Ay,
stars with ... Dy'd darkening_ Leo conj. _As stars with ... Disastrous
dimm'd_ or _And stars with ... Disastrous dimm'd_ Anon. conj. (N. and
Q.) _Asters with ... Disasters in_ Brae conj. (N. and Q.) _As stars,
with ... Disastrous, ev'n_ or _As stars, with ... Disastrous hid_
Taylor conj. MS.

_As stars with ... Distempered_ or _As stars with ... Discoloured_
Staunton conj.

[74] _in_] _veil'd_ Rowe. _dim'd_ Capell.

[75] _fierce_] Q₅ Q₆. _fearce_ Q₄. _feare_ Q₂ Q₃. _fear'd_ Collier conj.

[76] _As_] _Are_ Mitford conj.

[77] _omen_] _omen'd_ Theobald. _omens_ Becket conj.

[78] _climatures_] _climature_ Dyce conj.

Re-enter Ghost.] Enter Ghost. Qq. Enter Ghost againe. Ff.

[79] [It spreads his armes. Qq. om. Ff. He spreads his arms. Q (1676).

[80] _Speak ... done_] As in Pope. One line in Qq Ff.

[81] _That ... Speak to me_] As in Qq. One line in Ff.

[82] _Which ... speak!_] As in Qq. One line in Ff.

[83] _foreknowing_] _foreknowledge_ Collier MS. See note (II).

[84] _you_] Ff. _your_ Qq.

[85] [The cock crows.] Qq, after line 138. om. Ff.

[86] _at_] Ff. om. Qq.

[87] Hor ... Ber ... Hor ... Mar.] Ber ... Mar ... Ber ... Hor.
Steevens conj.

[88] _if it will_] _if't will_ S. Walker conj., ending lines 140, 141
_Do, ... gone!_

[89] [Exit Ghost.] Ff. om. Qq.

[90] _For it is, as_] _It is ever as_ Q (1676).

[91] _morn_] _morne_ Qq. _morning_ (Q₁). _day_ Ff.

[92] _warning, ... confine:_] _warning, Th' extravagant ... hies To his
confine, whether in sea or air, Or earth or fire_ Johnson conj.

[93] _extravagant_] _extra-vagate_ Grey conj.

[94] _on_] _at_ Q (1676).

[95] _say_] Qq. _sayes_ Ff.

[96] _The_] (Q₁) Ff. _This_ Qq.

[97] _then_] om. F₂F₃F₄.

_dare stir_] _dare sturre_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _dare stirre_ Q₅. _dares stirre_
Q₆. _dare walke_ (Q₁). _can walke_ Ff. _dares walk_ Rowe. _walks_ Pope.

[98] _takes_] Qq. _talkes_ F₁ F₂. _talks_ F₃ F₄.

_nor_] _no_ Q₆ F₄.

[99] _the_] Ff. _that_ (Q₁) Qq.

[100] _eastward_] Qq. _easterne_ Ff.

[101] _advice_] Ff. _advise_ Qq.

[102] _for, upon my life,_] _perhaps_ Q (1676).

[103] _shall_] _do_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[104] _Let's_] _Let_ F₁.

[105] _conveniently_] (Q₁) Ff. _convenient_ Qq.

A room ...] Capell, substantially. The Palace. Rowe

Flourish.] Qq. om. Ff.

[106] Enter ...] Malone, after Capell. Enter Claudius, King of
Denmarke, Gertrad the Queene, Counsaile: as Polonius, and his Sonne
Laertes, Hamlet, Cum Alijs. Qq. Enter Claudius King of Denmarke,
Gertrude the Queene, Hamlet, Polonius, Laertes, and his Sister Ophelia,
Lords Attendant. Ff (Attendants F₂ F₃ F₄).

[107] _Though ... memory be_] _As ... memory's_ Seymour conj.

[108] _that it us befitted_] _us befitted_ Steevens conj. _it befitted
us_ Seymour conj.

_us befitted_] _fitted_ Pope.

[109] _bear_] _bathe_ Collier MS.

[110] _sometime_] Qq. _sometimes_ Ff.

[111] _to_] Qq. _of_ Ff.

[112] _an ... a_] Qq. _one ... one_ Ff. _once ... once_ Becket conj.

_a dropping_] _one drooping_ Grant White.

[113] _along. For ... thanks._] _along: (for ... thanks.)_ Pope. _along
(for all our thankes)_ Qq. _along, for all our thankes._ Ff.

[114] _know, young_] _know: young_ S. Walker conj.

[115] _Colleagued_] _Collogued_ Hanmer (Theobald conj). _Co-leagued_
Capell. _Colluded_ Becket conj.

_this_] Qq. _the_ Ff.

_his_] _this_ Long MS. and Collier MS. See note (II).

[116] _with_] _by_ Pope.

_bonds_] Ff. _bands_ Qq.

[117] [Enter Voltemand and Cornelius. Ff (Voltimand F₂ F₃ F₄). om. Qq.

[118] _meeting:_] F₄. _meeting,_ Qq. _meeting_ F₁ F₂ F₃.

[119] _bed-rid_] _bedred_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.

[120] _gait_] Capell. _gate_ Qq Ff.

_herein; in_] _heerein, in_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _herein, in_ Q₅ Q₆. _herein. In_
Ff.

_the_] _he_ F₃ F₄.

[121] _subject_] _subjects_ Q₆.

_here_] _now_ Q (1676).

[122] _Voltimand_] F₂ F₃ F₄. _Valtemand_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _Voltemand_ F₁
Q₆. _Voltemar_ (Q₁).

[123] _For bearers_] (Q₁) Qq. _For bearing_ Ff. _Our bearers_ Theobald
conj.

_For bearers of this greeting_] _Ambassadors_ Q (1676).

[124] _Giving to you ... To business_] _Who have ... Of treaty_ Q
(1676). _Giving to you ... Of treaty_ Rowe.

_more than_] _than does_ Seymour conj.

[125] _Of_] _Which_ Pope.

_delated_] Qq. _dilated_ Ff. _related_ (Q₁) Singer (ed. 1).

_allow._] _allows._ Johnson. _allow._ [Give them. Collier MS. See note
(II).

[126] _duty_] _service_ S. Walker conj.

[127] Cor. Vol.] Cor. Vo. Qq. Volt. Ff.

[128] _it nothing_] _in nothing_ F₄.

[Exeunt....] F₄. Exit ... F₁ F₂ F₃. Omitted in Qq.

[129] _And_] om. Q (1676).

[130] _lose_] Qq. _loose_ Ff.

[131] _not thy_] _nor thy_ Q (1676).

[132] _head_] _blood_ Hanmer (Warburton).

_native_] _motive_ Bubier conj.

[133] _is ... to_] _to ... is_ Hanmer (Warburton).

[134] _My dread_] Qq. _Dread my_ Ff. _My Dear_ Q (1676).

[135] _toward_] Qq. _towards_ Ff.

[136] _Have ... Polonius?_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[137] _He hath_] _Hath_ Q₂ Q₃.

_lord,_] _lord:_ Ff.

[138] _wrung ... petition_] _by laboursome petition, Wrung from me my
slow leave_ Rowe and Pope.

[139] _wrung ... consent:_] Qq. Omitted in Ff.

[140] _at last_] _at the last_ Pope.

[141] _be thine ... spend_] _is thine, And my best graces; spend_
Johnson conj.

[142] _graces_] _graces;_ Q₆.

[Exit Laertes. Anon. conj. Exit. (Q₁).

[143] _Hamlet, and_] _Hamlet.--Kind_ Warburton.

_son,--_] _son--_ Rowe. _sonne._ Qq. _sonne?_ Ff.

[144] [Aside] Warburton.

[145] _so_] Ff. _so much_ Qq.

_i' the sun_] _i' th' Sun_ Ff. _in the sonne_ Qq. _in the Sun_ Q (1676).

[146] _nighted_] Qq. _nightly_ Ff. _night-like_ Collier MS.

[147] _vailed_] Qq. _veyled_ F₁ F₂. _veiled_ F₃ F₄.

[148] _know'st 'tis_] _know'st--'tis_ Seymour conj.

_common;_] Theobald. _common,_ Ff. _common_ Qq.

_lives_] Qq F₁. _live_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[149] _my inky_] _this mourning_ Q (1676).

_good mother_] Ff. _coold mother_ Q₂ Q₃. _could smother_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

[150] _moods_] _modes_ Capell.

_shapes_] Q₄ Q₅ Q₆. _chapes_ Q₂ Q₃. _shewes_ F₁ F₂. _shews_ F₃ F₄.

[151] _denote_] Ff Q₆. _deuote_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _deuoute_ Q₅.

_indeed_] _may_ Pope.

[152] _passes_] Qq. _passeth_ Ff.

[153] _'Tis_ ... _Hamlet,_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_sweet and_] om. Seymour conj.

_Hamlet,_] om. Pope.

[154] _That_] _The_ F₄.

_lost, lost his_] _dead, lost his_ (Q₁). _his_ Pope.

[155] _sorrow_] _sorrowes_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

_persever_] _persevere_ Q₆ F₄.

[156] _is a course Of_] _dares express An_ Q (1676).

[157] _'tis_] om. Pope.

[158] _a mind_] _or minde_ Qq.

[159] _absurd_] _absur'd_ F₂ F₃.

[160] _corse_] _course_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _coarse_ Ff Q₆.

[161] _unprevailing_] _unavailing_ Hanmer.

[162] _for let_] _and let_ Q (1676).

[163] _with_] _with't_ Theobald.

_no less nobility_] _nobility no less_ Badham conj.

[164] _with ... impart_] _still ... impart_ or _with ... my part_ Mason
conj.

[165] _Do I_] _Mine do I_ Keightley.

_toward_] Qq. _towards_ Ff.

_you. For_] Ff. _you for_ Qq.

[166] _in Wittenberg_] _to Wittenberg_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

[167] _retrograde_] F₁ Q₆ F₄. _retrogard_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _retrograd_ Q₅.
_retrogarde_ F₂ F₃.

[168] _bend_] _beg_ Anon. MS.

[169] _mother_] _Brother_ F₄.

_lose_] Ff Q₆. _loose_ The rest.

[170] _I pray thee_] Qq. _I prythee_ F₁. _I prethee_ F₂ F₃. _I prithee_
F₄.

[171] _I ... madam._] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[172] _Why_] om. Q (1676).

[173] _to_] _at_ Hanmer. _on_ Ritson conj.

[174] _tell_] _tell it_ Hanmer.

[175] _rouse_] _rowse_ Qq. _rouce_ Ff.

_heaven_] Qq. _heavens_ Ff.

_bruit_] Q₆ F₃ F₄. _brute_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _bruite_ F₁ F₂.

[176] Flourish.] Qq. om. Ff.

Exeunt....] Qq. Exeunt. Manet Hamlet. Ff.

[177] SCENE III. Pope.

_too too solid_] _too-too-solid_ Theobald.

_solid_] Ff. _sallied_ (Q₁) Qq. _sullied_ Anon. conj.

[178] _canon_] Q (1703). _cannon_ Qq Ff.

_self-slaughter_] _seale slaughter_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.

_O God! God!_] _O God, O God!_ Ff. Om. Q (1676).

[179] _weary_] Ff Q₆. _wary_ The rest.

[180] _Seem_] _Seeme_ Qq. _Seemes_ F₁ F₂. _Seems_ F₃ F₄.

[181] _Fie on't! ah fie!_] om. Q (1676).

_ah fie_] Qq. _Oh fie,_ fie F₁ F₂. _Oh fie_ F₃. _O fie_ F₄.

[182] _merely. That_] Pointed as in Ff. _meerely that_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.
_meerly: that_ Q₆.

_come to this_] Ff. _come thus_ Qq.

[183] _that ... satyr:_] Omitted in Q (1676).

[184] _satyr_] F₄. _satire_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _Satyre_ Q₅ F₁ F₂ Q₆ F₃.

[185] _he ... heaven_] _the beteened winds of heaven might not_ Becket
conj.

_might not beteem_] _permitted not_ Q (1676) and Rowe. _would not let
e'en_ Theobald (in text, ed. 1). _might not let e'en_ Theobald (in
note, ed. 1, and text, ed. 2).

_beteem_] _beteeme_ Qq. _beteene_ F₁ F₂. _beteen_ F₃. _between_ F₄.
_permit_ Southern MS.

[186] _Heaven ... remember?_] Omitted in Q (1676).

[187] _remember?_] Rowe. _remember,_ Qq. _remember:_ Ff.

_why, she would_] Pope. _why she would_ Ff. _why she should_ Qq. _she
used to_ Q (1676).

_on_] _upon_ Anon MS.

[188] _and_] om. Pope.

[189] _on't_] om. Pope.

[190] _shoes_] _shoos_ F₃. _shooes_ The rest. _shows_ Ingleby conj.

_month, or_] Ff. _month or_ Q₂ Q₃. _month. Or_ Q₄ Q₅. _month: Or_ Q₆.

_or ere_] Qq Ff. _or e'er_ Rowe.

[191] _follow'd_] Rowe. _followed_ Qq Ff.

[192] _tears_] _in tears_ Anon. MS.

_tears:--why_] _teares, why_ Qq. _teares. Why_ Ff.

_even she,_] Ff. Omitted in Qq.

[193] _O God_] Qq. _O Heaven_ Ff.

_of reason_] _and reason_ Gifford conj.

[194] _with my_] Qq. _with mine_ Ff.

[195] _but_] om. Pope.

[196] _most unrighteous_] _moist and righteous_ Badham conj.

[197] _in_] Qq. _of_ Ff.

[198] _dexterity_] _celerity_ S. Walker conj.

[199] _break, my_] F₄. _breake my_ or _break my_ The rest.

Marcellus, and Bernardo.] Qq (Barnardo Q₆). Barnard, and Marcellus. Ff.

[200] SCENE IV. Pope.

_well_] om. Collier (Collier MS.)

[201] _I ... myself_] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

[202] _Horatio,--_] Theobald. _Horatio,_ Qq Ff. _Horatio?_ Pope.

_do_] om. Q (1676).

[203] _The ... ever._] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[204] _Sir, ... you:_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[205] _Marcellus?_] Capell. _Marcellus._ Qq Ff. _Marcellus!--_ Rowe.

[206] _lord?_] Edd. _lord._ Qq Ff. _lord--_ Rowe. _lord!_ Keightley.

[207] _you. Good even, sir._] _you, (good even sir)_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _you
(good even sir_) Q₅ Q₆. _you: good even sir._ Ff (_even,_ F₄). _you
good:--even, sir._ Jackson conj.

[To Ber.] Edd.

_even_] _morning_ Hanmer.

[208] _what_] om. F₄.

_in faith_] om. Q (1676).

[209] _good my_] _my good_ Q (1676).

[210] _hear_] _heare_ Qq. _have_ Ff.

[211] _my_] Qq. _mine_ Ff.

[212] _make_] _take_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

_make it truster_] _be a witness_ Q (1676).

[213] _Elsinore_] Malone. _Elsonoure_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _Elsenour_ F₁ F₂ Q₆
F₃. _Elsenoore_ F₄.

[214] _to drink deep_] (Q₁) Ff. _for to drinke_ Qq.

[215] _I prethee_] Qq. _I pray thee_ F₁. _I prythee_ F₂. _I prithee_ F₃
F₄.

_student_] _studient_ Q₂ Q₃.

[216] _see_] (Q₁) Ff. Omitted in Qq.

[217] _follow'd_] Q₆. _followed_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅ F₁. _followeth_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[218] _Or ever I had_] Qq. _Ere I had ever_ Ff. _Ere ever I had_ (Q₁)
Collier. _E're I had_ Q (1676).

[219] _O where_] Ff. _Where_ Qq.

[220] _He ... He_] Ff. _a ... A_ Qq.

[221] _for_] _from_ Theobald (ed. 1), a misprint.

[222] _I shall_] _I should_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _Eye shall_ Samwell apud Holt
conj.

[223] _Saw? who?_] Ff. _Saw, who?_ (Q₁) Qq. _Saw who?_ Q (1676) and
Singer (ed. 2). _Saw! whom?_ Johnson.

[224] _Season_] _Defer_ Q (1676).

_for_] _but_ Q (1676) and Theobald.

[225] _attent_] Q₂ Q₃ F₁ F₂. _attentive_ (Q₁) Q₄ Q₅ Q₆ F₃ F₄.]

_may_] om. Pope.

[226] _marvel_] _wonder_ Q (1676).

_For God's love,_] _Pray_ Q (1676).

_God's_] _Gods_ Qq. _Heavens_ Ff.

[227] _vast_] (Q₁) Q₅ Q₆. _wast_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ F₁. _waste_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _waist_
Malone.

[228] _Armed at point_] Qq (_poynt_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄). _Armed to poynt_ (Q₁).
_Arm'd at all points_ Ff.

_cap-a-pe_] _Capapea_ (Q₁) Q₂ Q₃. _Cap apea_ Q₄ Q₅. _Cap a Pe_ Ff. _Cap
a pe_ Q₆.

[229] _stately by them: thrice_] _stately by them; thrice_ Qq.
_stately: By them thrice_ Ff.

[230] _fear-surprised_] Hyphened in Ff.

[231] _his_] _this_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

_distill'd_] Q₅ Q₆ _distilled_ (Q₁). _distil'd_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _bestil'd_
F₁. _bestill'd_ F₂. _be still'd_ F₃ F₄. _bechill'd_ Collier (Collier
MS). _dissolv'd_ or _both thrill'd_ or _bethrill'd_ Bailey conj.

[232] _the act of_] _their_ Q (1676). _th' effect of_ Warburton.

_act of fear,_] _act: Of fear_ Becket conj.

[233] _In ... did;_] _They did impart in dreadful secresie,_ Q (1676).

[234] _Where, as_] Q₆. _Where as_ (Q₁). _Whereas_ The rest.

_deliver'd, both in_] _deliver'd both, in_ Long MS.

[235] _apparition_] _apparision_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄.

[236] _you not_] _not you_ Players' reading.

[237] _made it_] _it made_ Q₆.

[238] _its_] Q₅ Q₆ F₃ F₄. _his_ (Q₁) Staunton. _it_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ F₁ F₂.

[239] _like_] om. Q (1676).

[240] _honour'd_] _honourable_ F₂ F₄. _honorable_ F₃.

[241] _writ down in_] _then_ Q (1676).

[242] _of_] om. Q (1676).

[243] _Indeed, indeed_] (Q₁) Ff. _Indeede_ Qq. Seymour would read as
Qq, and end the lines _but ... to-night?_

[244] Mar. Ber.] All. (Q₁) Qq. Both. Ff.

[245] _My lord,_] om. Q (1676).

[246] _My ... up._] As two lines, the first ending _not,_ in Steevens
(1793).

[247] _face?_] _face._ Q₂ Q₃.

[248] _up_] _down_ Anon. ap. Hunter conj.

[249] _What, look'd he_] Pointed as in Ff. No stop in Qq. _How look'd
he,_ Staunton, from (Q₁).

[250] Three lines ending _like, ... haste ... longer,_ in Capell.

[251] _Very like, very like_] (Q₁) Ff. _Very like_ Qq.

[252] _moderate_] _modern_ Knight, ed. 1 (a misprint).

_a_] _an_ Q₆.

_hundred_] _hundreth_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.

[253] Mar. Ber.] Both. Qq. All. Ff.

[254] _grizzled? no?_] _grissl'd, no._ Qq. _grisly? no._ F₁. _grisly?_
F₂ F₃ F₄. _grizled?_ Q (1676). _grisl'd? no._ Warburton. _grizl'd? no?_
Capell.

[255] _no?_ Hor. _It was_] Hor. _No! It was_ Anon. conj. (Gent. Mag.
LX. 403).

[256] _as_] om. F₃ F₄.

[257] _I will_] Qq. _Ile_ or _I'll_ Ff, reading _Ile ... againe_ as one
line.

[258] _walk_] _wake_ F₁.

_warrant_] (Q₁). _warn't_ Qq. _warrant you_ Ff.

[259] _conceal'd_] _concealed_ F₃ F₄.

[260] _be tenable in_] _require_ Q (1676).

_tenable_] Qq. _tenible_ (Q₁). _treble_ F₁ F₄. _trebble_ F₂ F₃.
_tabled_ Nicholson conj. (withdrawn).]

_tenable in your_] _in your treble_ Bailey conj.

_tenable ... still_] _treble ... now_ Warburton conj. (withdrawn).

[261] _whatsoever_] _what somever_ Q₂ Q₃. _else shall hap_] _shall
befall_ Pope.

[262] _fare_] _farre_ Q₂ Q₃.

_you_] Qq. _ye_ Ff.

[263] _eleven_] _a leaven_ Q₂ Q₃.

[264] _duty_] _duties_ (Q₁) Grant White.

_honour_] _homor_ Q₄.

[265] _loves_] Qq. _love_ Ff.

_farewell._] _so fare you well._ Seymour conj.

[Exeunt ... Hamlet.] Exeunt. Manet Hamlet. Q (1676). Exeunt Hor. Mar.
and Ber. Capell. Exeunt. (after line 252) (Q₁) Qq Ff.

[266] _spirit in arms!_] F₄. _spirit in armes?_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _spirit (in
armes)_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _spirit in armes,_ Q₆. _spirit! in arms!_ Rann
(Whalley conj.)

[267] _foul_] _fonde_ Q₂ Q₃.

_rise, Though ... them, to_] _rise, (Tho' ... them) to_ Pope. _rise
Though ... them to_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _rise, Though ... them to_ Ff Q₆.
_rise, Though ... them from_ Q (1676) and Long MS.

[268] SCENE III.] SCENE V. Pope.

A room....] An apartment.... Pope. Ophelia.] Ff. Ophelia his Sister. Qq.

[269] _embark'd_] _inbarekt_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _imbarkt_ Q₅ Q₆. _imbark't_ F₁
F₂. _imbark'd_ F₃ F₄.

[270] _convoy is assistant,_] _convoy is assistant;_ Ff. _convay, in
assistant_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _convay, in assistant,_ Q₅. _convay in assistant,_
Q₆.

_sleep_] _slip_ Theobald conj. (withdrawn).

[271] _favour_] Qq. _favours_ Ff.

[272] _youth of primy_] _youth, a prime of_ Q (1676).

_primy_] _prime_ Q₆.

[273] _Forward_] Qq F₃ F₄. _Froward_ F₁ F₂.

_sweet, not_] _tho' sweet, not_ Rowe. _sweet, but not_ Capell.

[274] _perfume and_] Qq. om. Ff.

_suppliance_] _soffiance_ Johnson conj.

_minute;_] F₂ F₃ F₄. _minute_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _minute?_ F₁. _minute:_ Q₆.

[275] _No more._] As in Qq. At end of line 9, in Ff. _but no more_
Collier MS. See note (II).

_so?_] Rowe. _so._ Qq Ff.

_no more_] _mo more_ Q₄.

[276] _crescent_] F₄. _cressant_ The rest.

[277] _bulk_] _bulkes_ Qq.

_this_] Qq. _his_ Ff. _the_ Hanmer.

[278] _and_] om. Q₄.

[279] _soil nor_] _foyle nor_ F₂ F₃. _foil nor_ F₄. _soil of_
Warburton. _soil, or_ So quoted by Heath.

[280] _will_] Qq. _feare_ F₁ F₂. _fear_ F₃ F₄.

_fear,_] _feare,_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _feare_ F₁ F₂ Q₆. _fear_ F₃ F₄. _fear;_
Keightley.

[281] _weigh'd_] Ff. _wayd_ Q₂ Q₃. _waid_ Q₄ Q₅. _wai'd_ Q₆.

[282] _For ... birth:_] Ff. Omitted in Qq.

[283] _unvalued_] _inferior_ Q (1676).

[284] _Carve for_] _Crave for_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆. _Bestow_ Q (1676).

[285] _safety_] Q₄ Q₆. _safty_ Q₂ Q₃. _safetie_ Q₅. _sanctity_ Ff.
_sanity_ Hanmer (Theobald conj.)

_health_] _the health_ Warburton.

_this_] Qq. _the_ Ff.

_whole_] _weole_ F₁.

[286] _he is the_] _he's_ Pope.

[287] _particular act and place_] Qq. _peculiar sect and force_ Ff.
_peculiar act and place_ Pope.

[288] _weigh_] _way_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄.

_what_] _that_ F₃ F₄.

[289] _too_] _two_ F₂ F₃.

[290] _lose_] F₁ F₂ F₃. _loose_ Qq F₄.

[291] _unmaster'd_] _unmastred_ Qq F₁ F₂ F₃. _unmastered_ F₄.

[292] _keep you in_] Qq. _keepe within_ Ff.

[293] _galls_] _gaules_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _Galls,_ F₁.

_infants_] Q₂ Q₃ F₁. _infant_ Q₄ Q₅ F₂ Q₆ F₃ F₄.

[294] _their_] Qq. _the_ Ff.

[295] _effect_] _effects_ Pope.

[296] _As watchman to_] _About_ Q (1676).

_watchman_] Q₂ Q₃. _watchmen_ The rest.

_my_] om. Q (1676).

[297] _steep_] _step_ Q₂.

to heaven] of heaven Q₆.

[298] _Whilst, like a_] _Whilst like a_ Ff. _Whiles a_ Qq. _Whilst, he
a_ Warburton. _While as a_ Seymour conj.

_puff'd and reckless_] om. Q (1676).

_reckless_] _careless_ Pope.

[299] _Himself ... treads_] _Thyself ... tread'st_ Seymour conj.

[300] _recks_] Pope, _reakes_ Qq F₂. _reaks_ F₁ F₃ F₄. _reck'st_
Seymour conj.

_his_] _thine_ Seymour conj.

_rede_] _reed_ Qq. _reade_ F₁ F₂. _read_ F₃ F₄. _tread_ Smyth conj. MS.

[301] SCENE VI. Pope.

Enter Polonius.] As in Capell. After _reed_ in Qq: after _not_ in Ff.

[302] [Kneeling to Polonius. Capell.

[303] _Aboard, aboard_] _Get aboard_ Pope.

[304] _stay'd_] _stayed_ Q₂ Q₃. _staied_ Q₄ Q₅.

_for. There; my_] Theobald, substantially. _for, there my_ (Q₁) Qq.
_for there: my_ Ff.

_thee_] (Q₁) Qq. _you_ Ff.

[Laying his hand on Laertes's head. Theobald.

[305] _Look_] Qq. _See_ Ff.

[306] _Those_] (Q₁) Qq. _The_ Ff.

[307] _them to_] (Q₁) Ff. _them unto_ Qq. _unto_ Seymour conj.

_hoops_] _hooks_ Pope.

[308] _dull_] _stale_ S. Walker conj.

[309] _new-hatch'd_] _new hatcht_ Qq. _unhatch't_ Ff.

_comrade_] Ff. _courage_ (Q₁) Qq. _court-ape_ Badham conj.

[310] _opposed_] (Q₁) Q₂ Q₃ Ff. _opposer_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

[311] _thy ear_] _thy eare_ Qq. _thine eare_ or _thine ear_ Ff.

[312] _Are ... that._] See note (III).

[313] _lender be_] Ff. _lender boy_ Qq.

[314] _loan_] F₃ F₄. _Loane_ F₂. _lone_ F₁. _loue_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _love_
Q₆.

_loses_] Ff Q₆. _looses_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.

[315] _And_] Qq F₁. _A_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

_dulls the edge_] Ff Q₆. _dulleth edge_ Q₂ Q₃. _dulleth the edge_ Q₄ Q₅.

[316] _night_] _light_ Warburton.]

_the day_] _to day_ Q₆.

[317] _thee!_] Pope. _thee._ Qq Ff.

[318] _do I_] _I do_ Q (1676).

[319] _invites_] Ff. _invests_ Qq.

[320] _to you_] om. Pope.

_in_] om. F₃.

[321] [Exit.] Exit Laertes. Qq. Exit Laer. Ff.

[322] _hath_] om. F₃ F₄.

[323] _Lord_] Qq. _L._ Ff.

[324] _you? give ... truth._] Q₆. _you give ... truth,_ Q₂ Q₃. _you
give ... truth._ Q₄ Q₅. _you, give ... truth?_ Ff.

[325] _pooh!_] _puh,_ Qq. _puh._ Ff.

[326] _Unsifted_] _Unsighted_ Becket conj.

[327] _I'll_] _Ile_ F₁ F₂. _I'le_ F₃ F₄. _I will_ Qq.

[328] _these_] Qq. _his_ Ff.

[329] _sterling_] Qq. _starling_ F₁ F₂ F₄. _startling_ F₃.

[330] _Running_] Dyce (Collier conj.) _Wrong_ Qq. _Roaming_ Ff.
_Wronging_ Pope. _Wringing_ Theobald (Warburton). _Ranging_ Theobald
conj. _Worrying_ Badham conj. _Urging_ or _Working_ Anon. conj. See
note (IV).

[331] _call it_] _call't_ Pope.

[332] _to his_] _to it in his_ Collier MS. See note (II).

[333] _my lord ... heaven_] As in Rowe. One line in Qq Ff.

[334] _almost ... holy_] Qq. _all the_ Ff. _almost all the_ Rowe.

[335] _springes_] (Q₁) Q₅ F₁ F₂ Q₆. _springs_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ F₃ F₄.

[336] _prodigal_] _prodigally_ Q (1676).

[337] _Lends_] (Q₁) Qq. _Gives_ Ff.

_daughter_] _oh my daughter_ Pope. _gentle daughter_ Capell. See note
(V).

[338] _both_] _birth_ Badham conj.

[339] _their_] _the_ Warburton.

[340] _take_] _take't_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

_From this time_] Qq. _For this time daughter,_ Ff. _From this time
daughter,_ Long MS.

[341] _something_] Qq. _somewhat_ Ff.

_your_] _thy_ Johnson.

[342] _entreatments_] Ff Q₆. _intreatments_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _intraitments_
Warburton.

[343] _parley_] Ff Q₆. _parle_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.

[344] _tether_] Ff. _tider_ Q₂ Q₃. _teder_ Q₄ Q₅. _tedder_ Q₆.

_may he_] _he may_ Warburton.

[345] _that dye_] Q₆. _that die_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _the eye_ Ff. _that eye_
Grant White.

[346] _mere_] om. Seymour conj.

_implorators_] _imploratotors_ Q₂ Q₃. _implorers_ Pope.

[347] _bawds_] Pope, ed. 2 (Theobald). _bonds_ Qq Ff. _bans_ Becket
conj. _lauds_ Anon. conj.

[348] _beguile_] _beguide_ Q₂ Q₃.

[349] _slander_] _squander_ Collier (Collier MS.)

_moment_] Q₂ Q₃ Ff. _moments_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆. _moment's_ Pope. _moments'_
Collier (ed. 2).

[350] _come_] _and so come_ Seymour conj. _so now, come_ Collier MS.

_ways_] _wayes_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ F₁ Q₆. _waies_ Q₅. _way_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[351] Oph. _I ... lord._] om. Seymour conj.

[352] SCENE IV.] Capell. om. Ff. SCENE III. Rowe. SCENE VII. Pope.

The platform.] The Platform before the Palace. Rowe.

and] om. Ff.

[353] _shrewdly_] F₁ Q₆. _shroudly_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _shrew'dly_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

_it is very cold._] Qq. _is it very cold?_ F₁ F₂. _it is very cold?_ F₃
F₄.

[354] _a_] om. Qq.

_an_] om. F₃ F₄.

[355] _is_] _ha's_ F₃ F₄. _has not_ Rowe (ed. 2).

_struck_] F₄. _strooke_ Qq F₁ F₂. _strook_ F₃.

[356] _Indeed? I_] Capell. _Indeed;_ I Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _Indeed I_ (Q₁) Ff.
_Indeed, I_ Q₆. _I_ Rowe.

_it then_] Qq. _then it_ Ff.

[357] [A flourish....] Malone, after Capell. A florish of trumpets and
2. peeces goes of. Qq (goe Q₆. off Q₄ Q₅ Q₆). A flourish of Trumpets
and Guns. Q (1676). Omitted in Ff. Noise of warlike Musick within. Rowe.

[358] _What ... my lord?_] Omitted in Steevens's reprint of Q₄.

[359] _wake_] _walke_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

[360] _wassail_] _wassel_ (Q₁). _wassell_ Qq. _wassels_ Ff.

_up-spring reels_] _up-spring reeles_ (Q₁) Qq. _upspring reeles_ F₁ F₂.
_upspring reels_ F₃ F₄. _upstart reels_ Pope. _upsy freeze_ Badham conj.

[361] _drains_] _takes_ Q (1676).

[362] _bray out_] _proclaim_ Q (1676).

[363] _Is it_] _It is_ F₂.

[364] _is't:_] _is it; of an antique date:_ Seymour conj.

[365] _But_] Qq. _And_ Ff.

_native_] _a native_ Hammer (ed. 2).

[366] _This ... fault._] Put in the margin by Pope.

[367] _This ... scandal._] Qq. Omitted in Ff.

[368] _revel_] _reueale_ Q₂ Q₃. _reuelle_ Q₄. _reuell_ Q₅ Q₆.

[369] _revel east and west Makes_] Pointed as in Qq. _revell, east and
west: Makes_ Pope (ed. 1). _revell, east and west, Makes_ Pope (ed. 2).
_revel east and west, Makes_ Warburton.

[370] _traduced_] _tradust_ Q₂ Q₃.

_tax'd_] Pope. _taxed_ Qq.

[371] _clepe_] Q₆. _clip_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.

[372] _So, oft_] Theobald. _So oft_ Qq.

[373] _mole_] _mould_ Theobald conj. (withdrawn).

[374] _the_] Pope. _their_ Qq.

[375] _livery_] _levity_ Becket conj.

_star_] _starre_ Qq. _scar_ Pope, ed. 2 (Theobald).

[376] _Their_] Pope, ed. 2 (Theobald). _His_ Qq.

[377] _the ... scandal_] Omitted by Pope.

[378] _the dram of eale ... of a doubt_] Q₂ Q₃. _the dram of ease ...
of a doubt_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆. _the dram of base ... of worth out_ Theobald.
_the dram of base ... oft eat out_ or _the dram of base ... soil with
doubt_ Heath conj. _the dram of ill ... of worth out_ Capell conj.
_the dram of base Doth eat the noble substance of worth out_ Id. conj.
_the dram of base ... oft adopt_ Holt conj. _the dram of base ... oft
work out_ Robertson and Davies conj. _the dram of ill ... of good out_
Jennens. _the dram of base ... of worth dout_ Malone. _the dram of
base ... often dout_ Steevens (1793). _the dram of base ... oft do out_
Id. conj. (withdrawn). _the dram of base ... of't corrupt_ Mason conj.
_the dram of doubt ... oft anneal_ Anon. conj. (1814). _the dream of
ease, The noble substance of a doubt,--doth all_ Becket conj. _the dram
of ale ... over dough or oft a-dough_ Jackson conj. _the dram of
ill ... often dout_ Caldecott. _the dram of bale ... often doubt_
Singer (ed. 1). _the dram of base ... of a doubt_ Singer (ed. 2). _the
dram of base ... oft adoubt_ Singer conj. _the dram of bale ... off and
out_ Delius. _the dram of base ... derogate_ Ingleby conj. _the dram of
lead ... of a ducat_ Id. conj. _the dram of ail ... of a doubt_ Nichols
conj. _the dram of lead ... of a pound_ Staunton conj. _the dram of
evil ... oft outdo_ Jervis conj. _the dram of base ... offer doubt_
Brae conj. (N. and Q.) _the dram of base Doth, all the noble substance
o'er, a doubt_ Anon. conj. (N. and Q.) _the dram of eale Doth all the
noble, substance of a doubt_ Corson conj. _the dram of vile Turns ...
of a draught_ Leo conj. _the dram of evil ... out of doubt or the dram
of evil ... of a courtier_ Keightley conj. (withdrawn). _the dram of
base ... often draw_ Arrowsmith conj. _the dram of evil ... oft debase_
Dyce (ed. 2). _the dram of eale ... oft endoubt_ Nicholson conj. _the
dram of calce ... so adapt_ Bullock conj. _the dram of earth ... so
adapt_ Bullock conj. (withdrawn). _the dram of base ... overcloud_
Lloyd conj. _the dram of base ... often drown_ Taylor conj. MS. _the
dram of ease ... oft work out_ Smyth conj. MS. See note (VI).

_the dram of leaven ... of a dough_ Cartwright conj. _the dram of
evil ... oft weigh down_ Bailey conj.

[379] _To his_] _To its_ Steevens conj. _By his_ Malone conj. _By it's_
Anon. apud Rann conj.

Enter Ghost.] Enter Ghost armed as before. Collier MS.

[380] _it_] _where it_ Q (1676).

[381] Pause marked after this line in Collier MS.

[382] _intents_] Qq. _events_ Ff. _advent_ Warburton.

[383] _a questionable_] _unquestionable_ Becket conj.

[384] _father, royal Dane: O_] _father,--Royal Dane, O_ Anon. conj. (St
James's Chronicle, Oct. 15, 1761).

_O_] Qq. _Oh, oh_ Ff.

[385] _tell ... death_] _tell why Heried and canoniz'd in death, thy
bones_ Becket conj.

_tell Why thy_] _tell why Thy_ Lloyd conj.

[386] _canonized_] _canoniz'd_ Qq Ff.

_canonized ... death_] _bones hears'd in canonized earth_ Hanmer.
_canoniz'd bones, hearsed in earth_ Warburton.

[387] _cerements_] Qq. _cerments_ F₁. _cearments_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[388] _inurn'd_] F₂ F₃ F₄. _enurn'd_ F₁. _interr'd_ (Q₁) Qq. _immured_
Anon. conj.

[389] _Revisit'st_] F₄. _Revisitst_ F₂ F₃. _Revisits_ Qq F₁.

_thus the ... moon,_] _thus, the ... moon_ Becket conj.

[390] _we_] _us_ Pope, ed. 2 (Theobald).

[391] _horridly_] _horribly_ Theobald.

[392] _the reaches_] Qq. _thee; reaches_ Ff.

[393] [Ghost beckons Hamlet.] Ghost beckens Hamlet. Ff. Beckins. Q₂ Q₃.
Beckons. Q₄ Q₅. Beckens. Q₆.

[394] _waves_] (Q₁) Qq. _wafts_ Ff.

_to a more_] _off to a_ Johnson.

_more removed_] _remote_ Q (1676). See note (VII).

[395] [Holding Hamlet. Rowe.

[396] _I will_] Qq. _will I_ Ff.

[397] _should_] _shall_ Q (1676).

[398] _fee;_] _fee?_ F₃ F₄.

[399] _as_] _like_ (Q₁) Q₆.

[400] _toward_] _towards_ Q₄ Q₅.

_flood_] _floods_ Q (1676).

_lord_] om. Q₂.

[401] _summit_] Rowe. _somnet_ Qq. _sonnet_ Ff.

_cliff_] F₃ F₄. _cleefe_ Qq. _cliffe_ F₁ F₂.

[402] _beetles_] Ff. _bettels_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

[403] _assume_] Qq. _assumes_ Ff.

[404] _deprive_] _deprave_ Hanmer (Warburton).

_your ... reason_] _you of your soveraign reason_ Collier MS. See note
(II).

_your ... reason_] _of sovereignty your_ Hunter conj.

[405] _draw_] _drive_ (Q₁) S. Walker conj.

_it:_] _it,_ Qq. _it?_ F₁. _it_. F₂ F₃ F₄.

[406] _The very ... beneath._] Qq. Omitted in Ff.

[407] _It ... thee._] As in Qq. One line in Ff.

[408] _waves_] Qq. _wafts_ Ff.

[409] _off_] _of_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄.

_hands_] Qq. _hand_ Ff.

[410] Hor.] Mar. Theobald.

[They struggle. Collier MS. See note (II).

[411] _artery_] Q₆. _arture_ Q₂ Q₃. _artyre_ Q₄. _attire_ Q₅ F₄.
_artire_ F₁ F₂ F₃.

_this_] _his_ F₃ F₄.

[412] _As hardy_] _Hardy_ Capell.

_Nemean_] Q₄ Q₅ Q₆ F₃ F₄. _Nemeon_ Q₂ Q₃. _Nemian_ F₁ F₂.

[Ghost beckons. Malone.

[413] _am I_] _I am_ Q (1676).

_call'd:_] _cald,_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _call'd;_ Q₆. _cal'd?_ F₁. _call'd?_ F₂
F₃ F₄.

[Breaking from them. Rowe.

[414] _on_] _one_ Q₄ Q₅.

[Exeunt....] Ff. Exit ... Qq.

[415] _imagination_] _imagion_ Q₂ Q₃.

[416] _Heaven_] _Heaven's_ Collier MS. See note (II).

_direct it_] _discover it_ Q (1676). _detect it_ Farmer conj.

[417] SCENE V.] Capell. SCENE VIII. Pope. Scene continued in Ff.

Another part ...] Capell. A more remote part ... Theobald.

Enter....] Re-enter ... Pope.

[418] _Whither_] (Q₁) Q₆. _Whether_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _Where_ Ff.

[419] _hour_] F₃ F₄. _houre_ Qq. _hower_ F₁. _honour_ F₂.

[420] _Pity ... unfold_] Prose in Q₄ Q₅.

[421] _thy_] _my_ Q₅.

[422] _hear._] _here,_ Q₄.

[423] _when_] _what_ Q (1676).

[424] _What?_] _Hear what?_ Keightley. _Revenge! what? how?_ Seymour
conj.

[425] _confined to fast_] _confined fast_ Theobald conj. (withdrawn).

_to fast in_] _to roast in_ Theobald conj. (withdrawn). _too fast in_
Warburton. _to lasting_ Singer, ed. 2 (Heath conj.) _to waste in_
Steevens conj. (withdrawn). _to fasting_ Jackson conj. _fast to_ Anon.
conj. ('Once a Week').

_And for_] _Tho' in_ Anon. MS.

[426] _that I am_] _being_ Seymour conj.

[427] _knotted_] (Q₁) Qq. _knotty_ Ff.

[428] _an end_] _on end_ (Q₁) Pope. _an-end_ Boswell.

[429] _fretful_] F₄. _fretfull_ (Q₁) F₁ F₂ F₃. _fearefull_ Qq.

_porpentine_] _porcupine_ Q (1676).

[430] _List, list_] Qq. _list Hamlet_ Ff (_Hamle_ F₂).

[431] _love--_] Rowe. _love._ Qq Ff.

[432] _God_] Qq. _Heaven_ Ff.

[433] _Murder!_] Q₆. _Murther_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _Murther?_ Ff.

[434] _Murder most_] _Most_ Seymour conj.

_in_] _at_ Long MS.

[435] _Haste me_] Rowe. _Hast me_ Qq. _Hast, hast me_ F₁. _Haste, haste
me_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

_Haste ... swift_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_know't_] Qq. _know it_ Ff. _know_ Pope.

_I_] om. F₁.

[436] _meditation_] _mediation_ Q₆.

[437] _sweep_] _flye_ Q (1676). _swoop_ Theobald conj. (withdrawn).

[438] _shouldst_] _shouldest_ Q₄ Q₅.

[439] _shouldst ... Wouldst_] _wouldst ... Shouldst_ Anon. conj. (Misc.
Obs. on Hamlet, 1752).

[440] _roots_] Q₅ Q₆. _rootes_ (Q₁) Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _rots_ Ff.

_itself ... wharf,_] _on Lethe's wharf: itself in ease,_--Becket conj.

_Lethe_] _Lethe's_ Q (1676) and Rowe.

[441] _'Tis_] Q₆. _Tis_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _It's_ Ff.

_my_] Qq. _mine_ Ff.

_orchard_] _garden_ Q (1676).

[442] _so_] om. Pope.

[443] _know, thou_] F₄. _knowe thou_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ F₁ F₂ Q₅ F₃. _know thou,_
Q₆.

[444] _life_] _heart_ Q (1676).

[445] _O my ... uncle!_] As in Dyce (S. Walker conj.) One line in Qq Ff.

[446] _My_] _my_ Qq. _mine_ Ff.

_uncle!_] Q₆. _uncle?_ Q₂ Q₃ Ff. _uncle:_ Q₄. _uncle._ Q₅.

[447] _Ay,_] _Ay, Ay_ S. Walker conj., ending line 41 _Ay._

_Ay, ... that adulterate_] _Incestuous, adulterate_ Seymour conj.

[448] _witchcraft_] _witchraft_ F₂.

_wit_] Pope. _wits_ Qq Ff.

_with_] Qq. _hath_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _and_ F₄.

_gifts,--_] _gifts,_ Qq F₃. _guifts._ F₁. _gifts._ F₂. _gifts_ F₄.

[449] _wit_] _wits_ Q₆.

[450] _to his_] Qq F₃ F₄. _to to this_ F₁. _to this_ F₂.

[451] _seeming-virtuous_] Hyphen inserted by Theobald.

[452] _a_] Ff Q₆. om. Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.

[453] _marriage; and to_] _marriage, to_ Ingleby conj.

[454] _To those ... moved,_] As in Pope. One line in Qq Ff.

[455] _mine!_] _mine, surpasses, almost, thinking._ Seymour conj.

[456] _lust,_] (Q₁) Ff. _but_ Qq.

_angel_] F₄. _angell_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _angle_ Qq.

[457] _Will ... garbage._] Arranged as in Qq. One line in Ff.

[458] _sate_] F₁ F₂. _sort_ Qq. _seat_ F₃ F₄.

[459] _prey_] _pray_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄.

_on_] _in_ F₃ F₄.

[460] _scent_] _sent_ Q₂ Q₃ F₁ Q₆.

_morning_] Qq. _mornings_ Ff.

[461] _within my orchard_] _in my garden_ Q (1676).

_my_] Qq. _mine_ Ff.

[462] _of_] Qq. _in_ (Q₁) Ff.

[463] _secure_] _secret_ Johnson.

_stole_] _to me stole_ Q (1676).

[464] _hebenon_] Ff. _hebona_ (Q₁) Qq. _hebon_ or _hemlock_ Elze conj.

_vial_] _viall_ Qq. _violl_ F₁ F₂. _viol_ F₃ F₄.

[465] _my_] Qq. _mine_ Ff.

[466] _effect Holds_] _effects Hold_ Q (1676).

[467] _alleys_] Hanmer. _allies_ (Q₁) Qq Ff.

[468] _vigour_] _rigour_ Staunton conj.

_posset_] Ff. _possesse_ Qq.

[469] _eager_] (Q₁) Qq. _Aygre_ Ff.

[470] _bark'd_] _barckt_ Q₂ Q₃. _barkt_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆. _bak'd_ Ff. _barked_
(Q₁).

[471] _of queen_] _of queene_ Qq. _and queene_ Ff (_queen_ F₃ F₄).

_dispatch'd_] _dismatch'd_ Becket conj. _despoil'd_ Collier MS.

[472] _blossoms_] _blossom_ Dyce conj.

[473] _Unhousel'd_] Theobald. _Unhuzled_ Q₂ Q₃. _Unnuzled_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.
_Unhouzzled_ Ff.

_disappointed_] _unanointed_ Pope. _unappointed_ Theobald.

_unanel'd_] Pope. _unanueld_ Q₂ Q₃. _un-anneld_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆. _unnaneld_
Ff. _unaneal'd_ Theobald. _unanoil'd_ Jennens. _and unknell'd_ Anon.
conj. (Gent. Mag. XLVI. 267). _unassoiled_ Boucher conj.

[474] _With all_] _Withall_ Q₂ Q₃.

[475] See note (VIII).

[476] _howsoever_] Ff. _howsomever_ Qq.

_pursuest_] Ff Q₆. _pursues_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.

[477] _Taint_] _Tain't_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄.

_contrive_] _design_ Q (1676).

[478] _matin_] _morning_ Q (1676). _matins_ so quoted in Drake's
_Shakespeare and his Times_, II. 414.

[479] _Adieu, adieu, adieu!_] _Adiew, adiew, adiew,_ Qq (_Adieu_ Q₆).
_Adue, adue, Hamlet:_ F₁ F₂. _Adieu, adieu, Hamlet:_ F₃ F₄. _Farewel_,
Q (1676).

[Exit.] Ff. om. Qq.

[480] _O fie! Hold, hold, my_] _Oh hold, my_ Pope. _Hold, hold, my_
Capell. _O fie! Hold,_ Collier MS.

_Hold, hold, my_] _hold, hold my_ Q₂ Q₃. _hold, my_ Q₄. _hold my_ Q₅ Ff
Q₆.

[481] _stiffly_] Ff. _swiftly_ Qq. _strongly_ Q (1676).

[482] _thee!_] Q₆. _thee,_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _thee?_ Ff.

[483] _while_] Ff. _whiles_ Qq.

[484] _saws_] _sawe_ Q₄. _saw_ Q₅ Q₆. _registers_ Q (1676).

_all pressures_] _and pressures_ Q (1676).

[485] _yes_] Qq. _yes, yes_ Ff.

[486] _pernicious_] _prenicious_ Q₄. _pernicious and perfidious_
Collier (Collier MS.)

[487] _My tables,--_] Pope. (_My tables_) (Q₁). _My tables,_ Qq. _My
Tables, my Tables;_ Ff.

_set it_] _set_ Q₆.

[488] _down, ... villain; ... me.' ... sworn't._] _down.-- ...
villain!... me.'_ [Writing _... sworn it._ [Having kissed the tables.
Brae conj.

[489] _I'm_] Ff. _I am_ Qq.

[Writing.] Rowe. om. Qq Ff. Opposite line 111, Keightley.

[490] _It ... sworn't._] Two lines in Qq. One in Ff. Capell puts _It
is_ in a separate line.

[491] _It is_] _Its--_ Jackson conj.

[492] _I have sworn't._] _I've sworn it--_ Pope.

[493] SCENE IX. Pope.

Hor. Mar. [Within] Ff. Hora. Qq. See note (IX).

[494] _Heaven_] Ff. _Heavens_ (Q₁) Qq.

[495] Ham.] Qq. Mar. Ff. Mar. [within. Knight.

[496] Mar.] Qq. Hor. Ff.

[497] _bird,_] Ff. _and_ Qq. _boy,_ (Q₁) Pope.

[498] Hor. _What news, my lord?_] Omitted in Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

[499] Ham.] Hora. Q₄ Q₅.

[500] _you will_] Qq. _you'l_ F₁. _you'll_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[501] _it?_] (Q₁) Ff Q₆. _it,_ The rest.

[502] _secret?_] Ff. _secret._ Qq. _secret--_ Theobald.

Hor. Mar.] Booth. Q₂ Q₃. Both. Q₄ Q₅ Ff Q₆.

_my lord._] (Q₁) Ff. Omitted in Qq.

[503] _There's ... Denmark_] One line in (Q₁) Ff. Two in Qq.

_ne'er_] F₂. _nere_ F₁. _ne're_ F₃ F₄. _never_ Qq.

[504] _Denmark But_] _Denmark--But_ Seymour conj.

[505] _But_] _Bate_ Becket conj.

[506] _There ... this._] As in Qq. Prose in Ff.

[507] _i' the_] _i' th'_ Ff. _in the_ Qq.

[508] _desire_] Qq. _desires_ (Q₁) Ff.

[509] _hath_] Qq. _ha's_ F₁. _has_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[510] _my_] Qq. _mine_ Ff.

[511] _Look you, I'll_] Ff. _I will_ Qq. _Look you, I will_ Capell.

[512] _whirling_] Theobald. _wherling_ (Q₁) _whurling_ Qq. _hurling_
Ff. _windy_ Q (1676). _hurting_ Collier MS. See note (II).

[513] _I'm_] Ff. _I am_ Qq.

_offend_] _offended_ F₃ F₄.

[514] _Yes, faith,_] _Yes,_ Pope. _'Faith,_ Capell.

[515] _Horatio_] (Q₁) Qq. _my Lord_ Ff.

[516] _too. Touching_] _too: touching_ Q₆. _too, touching_ (Q₁) Ff.
_to, touching_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.

_here,_] _heere,_ or _here,_ Qq. _heere:_ or _here:_ Ff.

[517] _O'ermaster't_] _Oremastret_ Q₂ Q₃. _O'er-master_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[518] _we will_] om. (Q₁) Pope. Mar. _We will_ Collier MS. See note
(II).

[519] Hor. Mar.] Booth. Q₂ Q₃. Both. The rest.

[520] _In faith, ... I._] Arranged as by Capell. One line in Qq Ff.

[521] _We have_] _We've_ Pope.

[522] _Indeed ... indeed._] _In deed ... in deed_ Staunton.

[523] Ghost. [Beneath] _Swear._] Capell. Ghost cries under the Stage.

Ghost. _Sweare._ Qq. Gho. _Sweare._ Ghost cries under the Stage. Ff.

[524] _Ah, ha, ... cellarage_] Arranged as in Qq. Prose in Ff.

[525] _Ah_] Ff. _Ha_ Qq.

_so?_] Q₆. _so,_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _so._ Ff.

[526] _on: you hear_] _one you here_ F₁.

[527] _the oath_] _my oath_ F₃ F₄.

[528] _seen,_] _seene_ Q₂ Q₃. _seene,_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆. _seene._ F₁ F₂.
_seen._ F₃ F₄.

[529] [Beneath] Capell. om. Qq Ff.

[530] _Hic_] _Hie_ Q₄ Q₅.

_ubique?_] Ff. _ubique,_ Qq.

_our_] Qq. _for_ Ff.

[531] See note (X).

[532] _this that_] _this which_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[533] _Swear._] (Q₁) Ff. _Sweare by his sword._ Qq.

[534] _canst_] _canst thou_ Q₆.

_earth_] (Q₁) Qq. _ground_ Ff.

[535] _good friends_] om. Seymour conj.]

_friends_] Qq F₁. _friend_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[536] _give_] _bid_ F₃ F₄.

[537] _your_] (Q₁) Qq. _our_ Ff.

[538] _Than ... come;_] As in Hanmer. One line in Qq Ff.

[539] _But come; Here_] _But_ Seymour conj.

[540] _Here_] _Swear_ Pope (ed. 2). _swear here_ Keightley, reading
_But ... mercy!_ as one line.

[541] _How ... on_] Put in parentheses in Pope. (ed. 1).

[542] _How ... note_] Put in parentheses in Qq.

[543] _soe'er_] _so ere_ Ff Q₆. _so mere_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.

[544] _As ... on_] Put in parentheses in Ff.

[545] _meet_] _fit_ So quoted by Theobald ('Shakespeare Restored').

[546] _times_] (Q₁) Qq. _time_ Ff.

[547] _this head-shake_] Theobald. _this head shake_ (Q₁) Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.
_thus, head shake_ Ff. _head thus shak't_ Q₆.

[548] _Or_] _Nor_ Malone conj.

[549] _Well, well,_] Qq. _well,_ Ff.

[550] _an if ... an if_] Hanmer. _and if ... and if_ Qq Ff. _and if ...
or if_ Q (1676). _an ... those; An if_ Seymour conj.

[551] _they_] (Q₁) Qq. _there_ Ff.

[552] _giving_] _givings_ Warburton.

_out, to note_] Steevens, 1793. (Malone conj.) _out, to note)_ Qq. _out
to note,_ Ff. _out to note_ Malone.

_to note_] _denote_ Pope, ed. 2 (Theobald). _to-note_ Porson conj. MS.

[553] _this ... Swear._] _this ... doe: So ... you: Sweare._ Ff.
_this doe sweare, So ... you._ Qq. _this you must swear. So ... you._
Q (1676). _this do ye swear. So ... you. Swear._ Pope. _This do you
swear, So ... you!_ Capell. _This not to do, swear; So ... you!_
Boswell.

[554] _Rest, rest,_] _Rest,_ Seymour conj.

[They swear.] Edd. (Globe ed.) om. Qq Ff.

[555] _I do_] om. F₂ F₃ F₄. _do I_ Theobald.

[556] _friending_] _friendship_ Q (1676).

[557] _God ... lack._] _Shall never fail,_ Q (1676).

_Let us go in_] _Let's go_ Anon. conj.

_together_] om. Hanmer.

[558] _pray._] Rowe. _pray,_ Qq Ff.

[559] _set_] see F₃ F₄.




ACT II.


SCENE I. _A room in Polonius's house._

                 _Enter_ POLONIUS _and_ REYNALDO.[560]

    _Pol._  Give him this money and these notes, Reynaldo.[561][562]

    _Rey._  I will, my lord.

    _Pol._  You shall do marvellous wisely, good Reynaldo,[562][563]
    Before you visit him, to make inquire[564]
    Of his behaviour.

    _Rey._            My lord, I did intend it.                        5

    _Pol._  Marry, well said, very well said. Look you, sir,[565]
    Inquire me first what Danskers are in Paris,[566]
    And how, and who, what means, and where they keep,
    What company, at what expense, and finding[567]
    By this encompassment and drift of question                       10
    That they do know my son, come you more nearer[568]
    Than your particular demands will touch it:[568]
    Take you, as 'twere, some distant knowledge of him,
    As thus, 'I know his father and his friends,[569]
    And in part him:' do you mark this, Reynaldo?[562]                15

    _Rey._ Ay, very well, my lord.

    _Pol._ 'And in part him; but,' you may say, 'not well:
    But if't be he I mean, he's very wild,[570]
    Addicted so and so;' and there put on him
    What forgeries you please; marry, none so rank                    20
    As may dishonour him; take heed of that;
    But, sir, such wanton, wild and usual slips
    As are companions noted and most known
    To youth and liberty.

    _Rey._                As gaming, my lord.

    _Pol._ Ay, or drinking, fencing, swearing, quarrelling,[571][572]  25
    Drabbing: you may go so far.[571]

    _Rey._ My lord, that would dishonour him.

    _Pol._ Faith, no; as you may season it in the charge.[573]
    You must not put another scandal on him,[574]
    That he is open to incontinency;[575]                             30
    That's not my meaning: but breathe his faults so quaintly
    That they may seem the taints of liberty,
    The flash and outbreak of a fiery mind,
    A savageness in unreclaimed blood,[576][577]
    Of general assault.[576]

    _Rey._              But, my good lord,--[578]                     35

    _Pol._ Wherefore should you do this?

    _Rey._                               Ay, my lord,[579][580]
    I would know that.[579]

    _Pol._             Marry, sir, here's my drift,
    And I believe it is a fetch of warrant:[581]
    You laying these slight sullies on my son,[582]
    As 'twere a thing a little soil'd i' the working,[583]            40
    Mark you,[584][585]
    Your party in converse, him you would sound,[584][586]
    Having ever seen in the prenominate crimes[587]
    The youth you breathe of guilty, be assured[588]
    He closes with you in this consequence;[589]                      45
    'Good sir,' or so, or 'friend,' or 'gentleman,'[590]
    According to the phrase or the addition[591]
    Of man and country.

    _Rey._              Very good, my lord.

    _Pol._ And then, sir, does he this--he does--what was I[592][593]
    about to say? By the mass, I was about to say something:[592][594]  50
    where did I leave?[592]

    _Rey._ At 'closes in the consequence,' at 'friend or so,'[595]
    and 'gentleman.'[595]

    _Pol._ At 'closes in the consequence,' ay, marry;[596]
    He closes with you thus: 'I know the gentleman;[597]              55
    I saw him yesterday, or t'other day,[598]
    Or then, or then, with such, or such, and, as you say,[599]
    There was a' gaming, there o'ertook in's rouse,[600]
    There falling out at tennis:' or perchance,[601]
    'I saw him enter such a house of sale,'[602]                      60
    Videlicet, a brothel, or so forth.[603]
    See you now;[603]
    Your bait of falsehood takes this carp of truth:[604]
    And thus do we of wisdom and of reach,
    With windlasses and with assays of bias,[605]                     65
    By indirections find directions out:[606]
    So, by my former lecture and advice,[607]
    Shall you my son. You have me, have you not?

    _Rey._ My lord, I have.

    _Pol._                  God be wi' ye; fare ye well.[608]

    _Rey._ Good my lord![609]                                         70

    _Pol._ Observe his inclination in yourself.[610]

    _Rey._ I shall, my lord.

    _Pol._ And let him ply his music.

    _Rey._                            Well, my lord.

    _Pol._ Farewell!                                   [_Exit Reynaldo._

                         _Enter_ OPHELIA.[611]

                          How now, Ophelia! what's the matter?

    _Oph._  O, my lord, my lord, I have been so affrighted![612]      75

    _Pol._  With what, i' the name of God?[613]

    _Oph._  My lord, as I was sewing in my closet,[614]
    Lord Hamlet, with his doublet all unbraced,[615]
    No hat upon his head, his stockings foul'd,[616]
    Ungarter'd and down-gyved to his ancle;[617]                      80
    Pale as his shirt, his knees knocking each other,
    And with a look so piteous in purport
    As if he had been loosed out of hell
    To speak of horrors, he comes before me.[618]

    _Pol._  Mad for thy love?

    _Oph._                    My lord, I do not know,[619]            85
    But truly I do fear it.[619]

    _Pol._                  What said he?

    _Oph._  He took me by the wrist and held me hard;[620]
    Then goes he to the length of all his arm,
    And with his other hand thus o'er his brow,
    He falls to such perusal of my face                               90
    As he would draw it. Long stay'd he so;[621]
    At last, a little shaking of mine arm,[622]
    And thrice his head thus waving up and down,
    He raised a sigh so piteous and profound[623]
    As it did seem to shatter all his bulk[624]                       95
    And end his being: that done, he lets me go:[625]
    And with his head over his shoulder turn'd,[626]
    He seem'd to find his way without his eyes;
    For out o' doors he went without their helps,[627]
    And to the last bended their light on me.                        100

    _Pol._ Come, go with me: I will go seek the king.[628]
    This is the very ecstasy of love;
    Whose violent property fordoes itself[629]
    And leads the will to desperate undertakings
    As oft as any passion under heaven[630]                          105
    That does afflict our natures. I am sorry.
    What, have you given him any hard words of late?

    _Oph._ No, my good lord, but, as you did command,
    I did repel his letters and denied
    His access to me.

    _Pol._            That hath made him mad.                        110
    I am sorry that with better heed and judgement[631]
    I had not quoted him: I fear'd he did but trifle[632]
    And meant to wreck thee; but beshrew my jealousy![633]
    By heaven, it is as proper to our age[634]
    To cast beyond ourselves in our opinions                         115
    As it is common for the younger sort
    To lack discretion. Come, go we to the king:[635]
    This must be known; which, being kept close, might move[636]
    More grief to hide than hate to utter love.[637]
    Come.                                           [_Exeunt._[638]  120


SCENE II. _A room in the castle._

       _Flourish. Enter_ KING, QUEEN, ROSENCRANTZ, GUILDENSTERN,
                         _and_ Attendants.[639]

    _King._ Welcome, dear Rosencrantz and Guildenstern![640][641]
    Moreover that we much did long to see you,
    The need we have to use you did provoke
    Our hasty sending. Something have you heard[642]
    Of Hamlet's transformation; so call it,[643]                       5
    Sith nor the exterior nor the inward man[644]
    Resembles that it was. What it should be,
    More than his father's death, that thus hath put him
    So much from th' understanding of himself,
    I cannot dream of: I entreat you both,[645]                       10
    That, being of so young days brought up with him
    And sith so neighbour'd to his youth and haviour,[646]
    That you vouchsafe your rest here in our court
    Some little time: so by your companies
    To draw him on to pleasures, and to gather                        15
    So much as from occasion you may glean,[647]
    Whether aught to us unknown afflicts him thus,[648]
    That open'd lies within our remedy.[649]

    _Queen._ Good gentlemen, he hath much talk'd of you,
    And sure I am two men there are not living[650]                   20
    To whom he more adheres. If it will please you
    To show us so much gentry and good will[651]
    As to expend your time with us awhile[652]
    For the supply and profit of our hope,
    Your visitation shall receive such thanks[653]                    25
    As fits a king's remembrance.

    _Ros._                        Both your majesties
    Might, by the sovereign power you have of us,[654]
    Put your dread pleasures more into command
    Than to entreaty.

    _Guil._           But we both obey,[655]
    And here give up ourselves, in the full bent                      30
    To lay our service freely at your feet,[656]
    To be commanded.[657]

    _King._ Thanks, Rosencrantz and gentle Guildenstern.[640][641]

    _Queen._ Thanks, Guildenstern and gentle Rosencrantz:[640][641]
    And I beseech you instantly to visit                              35
    My too much changed son. Go, some of you,[658]
    And bring these gentlemen where Hamlet is.[659]

    _Guil._ Heavens make our presence and our practices
    Pleasant and helpful to him!

    _Queen._                     Ay, amen!

          [_Exeunt Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and some Attendants._[660]

                           _Enter_ POLONIUS.

    _Pol._ The ambassadors from Norway, my good lord,                 40
    Are joyfully return'd.

    _King._ Thou still hast been the father of good news.

    _Pol._ Have I, my lord? I assure my good liege,[661]
    I hold my duty as I hold my soul,
    Both to my God and to my gracious king:[662]                      45
    And I do think, or else this brain of mine
    Hunts not the trail of policy so sure[663]
    As it hath used to do, that I have found[664]
    The very cause of Hamlet's lunacy.

    _King._ O, speak of that; that do I long to hear.[665]            50

    _Pol._ Give first admittance to the ambassadors;
    My news shall be the fruit to that great feast.[666]

    _King._ Thyself do grace to them, and bring them in.

                                                  [_Exit Polonius._[667]

    He tells me, my dear Gertrude, he hath found[668]
    The head and source of all your son's distemper.                  55

    _Queen._ I doubt it is no other but the main;
    His father's death and our o'erhasty marriage.[669]

    _King._ Well, we shall sift him.

         _Re-enter_ POLONIUS, _with_ VOLTIMAND _and_ CORNELIUS.

                                          Welcome, my good friends![670]
    Say, Voltimand, what from our brother Norway?[671]

    _Volt._ Most fair return of greetings and desires.                60
    Upon our first, he sent out to suppress
    His nephew's levies, which to him appear'd[672]
    To be a preparation 'gainst the Polack,[673]
    But better look'd into, he truly found
    It was against your highness: whereat grieved,                    65
    That so his sickness, age and impotence
    Was falsely borne in hand, sends out arrests
    On Fortinbras; which he, in brief, obeys,
    Receives rebuke from Norway, and in fine
    Makes vow before his uncle never more                             70
    To give the assay of arms against your majesty.
    Whereon old Norway, overcome with joy,
    Gives him three thousand crowns in annual fee[674]
    And his commission to employ those soldiers,
    So levied as before, against the Polack:[673]                     75
    With an entreaty, herein further shown,      [_Giving a paper._[675]
    That it might please you to give quiet pass
    Through your dominions for this enterprise,[676]
    On such regards of safety and allowance
    As therein are set down.[677]

    _King._                  It likes us well,                        80
    And at our more consider'd time we'll read,[678]
    Answer, and think upon this business.[679]
    Meantime we thank you for your well-took labour:
    Go to your rest; at night we'll feast together:[680]
    Most welcome home!                [_Exeunt Voltimand and Cornelius._

    _Pol._             This business is well ended.[681]              85
    My liege, and madam, to expostulate
    What majesty should be, what duty is,
    Why day is day, night night, and time is time,
    Were nothing but to waste night, day and time.
    Therefore, since brevity is the soul of wit[682]                  90
    And tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes,[683]
    I will be brief. Your noble son is mad:
    Mad call I it; for, to define true madness,[684]
    What is't but to be nothing else but mad?[685]
    But let that go.

    _Queen._         More matter, with less art.                      95

    _Pol._ Madam, I swear I use no art at all.
    That he is mad, 'tis true: 'tis true 'tis pity,[686]
    And pity 'tis 'tis true: a foolish figure;[687]
    But farewell it, for I will use no art.[688]
    Mad let us grant him then: and now remains                       100
    That we find out the cause of this effect,[689]
    Or rather say, the cause of this defect,
    For this effect defective comes by cause:
    Thus it remains and the remainder thus.[690][691]
    Perpend.[690][692]                                               105
    I have a daughter,--have while she is mine,--[693]
    Who in her duty and obedience, mark,
    Hath given me this: now gather and surmise.           [_Reads._[694]
    'To the celestial, and my soul's idol, the most beautified
              Ophelia,'--[695]
    That's an ill phrase, a vile phrase; 'beautified' is a vile[696]  110
    phrase: but you shall hear. Thus:                [_Reads._[697][698]
    'In her excellent white bosom, these,' &c.[697][699]

    _Queen._ Came this from Hamlet to her?

    _Pol._ Good madam, stay awhile; I will be faithful.   [_Reads._[700]
        'Doubt thou the stars are fire;                              115
          Doubt that the sun doth move;
        Doubt truth to be a liar;
          But never doubt I love.
    'O dear Ophelia, I am ill at these numbers; I have not
    art to reckon my groans: but that I love thee best, O most       120
    best, believe it. Adieu.
          'Thine evermore, most dear lady, whilst this
                  machine is to him, HAMLET.'[701]
    This in obedience hath my daughter shown me;[702]
    And more above, hath his solicitings,[703]                       125
    As they fell out by time, by means and place,
    All given to mine ear.

    _King._                But how hath she[704]
    Received his love?[704]

    _Pol._             What do you think of me?

    _King._ As of a man faithful and honourable.

    _Pol._ I would fain prove so. But what might you think,[705]     130
    When I had seen this hot love on the wing,--[706]
    As I perceived it, I must tell you that,
    Before my daughter told me,--what might you,
    Or my dear majesty your queen here, think,[707]
    If I had play'd the desk or table-book,[708]                     135
    Or given my heart a winking, mute and dumb,[709]
    Or look'd upon this love with idle sight;
    What might you think? No, I went round to work,
    And my young mistress thus I did bespeak:[710]
    'Lord Hamlet is a prince, out of thy star;[711]                  140
    This must not be:' and then I prescripts gave her,[712]
    That she should lock herself from his resort,[713]
    Admit no messengers, receive no tokens.
    Which done, she took the fruits of my advice;[714]
    And he repulsed, a short tale to make,[714][715]                 145
    Fell into a sadness, then into a fast,[716]
    Thence to a watch, thence into a weakness,[717][718]
    Thence to a lightness, and by this declension[718][719]
    Into the madness wherein now he raves[720]
    And all we mourn for.[721]                                       150

    _King._ Do you think this?

    _Queen._                   It may be, very like.[722]

    _Pol._  Hath there been such a time, I'ld fain know that,[723]
    That I have positively said ''tis so,'
    When it proved otherwise?

    _King._                   Not that I know.

    _Pol._ [_Pointing to his head and shoulder_] Take this
              from this, if this be otherwise:[724]                  155
    If circumstances lead me, I will find
    Where truth is hid, though it were hid indeed
    Within the centre.

    _King._            How may we try it further?[725]

    _Pol._ You know, sometimes he walks four hours together[726][727]
    Here in the lobby.[726]

    _Queen._           So he does, indeed.[728]                      160

    _Pol._ At such a time I'll loose my daughter to him:
    Be you and I behind an arras then;[729][730]
    Mark the encounter: if he love her not,[729]
    And be not from his reason fall'n thereon,
    Let me be no assistant for a state,                              165
    But keep a farm and carters.[731]

    _King._                      We will try it.

    _Queen._ But look where sadly the poor wretch comes reading.[732]

    _Pol._ Away, I do beseech you, both away:[733]
    I'll board him presently.

                                  [_Exeunt King, Queen, and Attendants._

                    _Enter_ HAMLET, _reading_.[734]

    O, give me leave: how does my good Lord Hamlet?[735]             170

    _Ham._ Well, God-a-mercy.

    _Pol._ Do you know me, my lord?

    _Ham._ Excellent well; you are a fishmonger.[736]

    _Pol._ Not I, my lord.

    _Ham._ Then I would you were so honest a man.                    175

    _Pol._ Honest, my lord![737]

    _Ham._ Ay, sir; to be honest, as this world goes, is to[738]
    be one man picked out of ten thousand.[738][739]

    _Pol._ That's very true, my lord.

    _Ham._ For if the sun breed maggots in a dead dog,[740]          180
    being a god kissing carrion--Have you a daughter?[741]

    _Pol._ I have, my lord.

    _Ham._ Let her not walk i' the sun: conception is a
    blessing; but as your daughter may conceive,--friend, look[742]
    to't.                                                            185

    _Pol._ [_Aside_] How say you by that? Still harping on[743]
    my daughter: yet he knew me not at first; he said I was a[743][744][745]
    fishmonger: he is far gone: and truly in my youth I[743][745][746][747]
    suffered much extremity for love; very near this. I'll[743][746][748]
    speak to him again. What do you read, my lord?[743][746][749]    190

    _Ham._ Words, words, words.

    _Pol._ What is the matter, my lord?[749]

    _Ham._ Between who?[750]

    _Pol._ I mean, the matter that you read, my lord.[751]

    _Ham._ Slanders, sir: for the satirical rogue says here that[752]  195
    old men have grey beards, that their faces are wrinkled,
    their eyes purging thick amber and plum-tree gum, and[753]
    that they have a plentiful lack of wit, together with most[754]
    weak hams: all which, sir, though I most powerfully and
    potently believe, yet I hold it not honesty to have it thus      200
    set down; for yourself, sir, shall grow old as I am, if like a[755]
    crab you could go backward.

    _Pol._ [_Aside_] Though this be madness, yet there is[756][757][758]
    method in't. Will you walk out of the air, my lord?[757]

    _Ham._ Into my grave.[759]                                       205

    _Pol._ Indeed, that's out of the air. [_Aside_] How pregnant[760][761]
    sometimes his replies are! a happiness that often madness[760][762]
    hits on, which reason and sanity could not so prosperously[760][763][764]
    be delivered of. I will leave him, and suddenly contrive[760][764][765][766]
    the means of meeting between him and my daughter. My[760][766][767]  210
    honourable lord, I will most humbly take my leave of you.[760][767]

    _Ham._ You cannot, sir, take from me any thing that I[768]
    will more willingly part withal: except my life, except my[769][770]
    life, except my life.[770]

    _Pol._ Fare you well, my lord.                                   215

    _Ham._ These tedious old fools!

              _Enter_ ROSENCRANTZ _and_ GUILDENSTERN.[771]

    _Pol._ You go to seek the Lord Hamlet; there he is.[772]

    _Ros._ [_To Polonius_] God save you, sir!        [_Exit Polonius._[773]

    _Guil._ My honoured lord![774]

    _Ros._ My most dear lord!                                        220

    _Ham._ My excellent good friends! How dost thou, Guildenstern?[775]
    Ah, Rosencrantz! Good lads, how do you both?[776]

    _Ros._ As the indifferent children of the earth.

    _Guil._ Happy, in that we are not over-happy;[777]
    On Fortune's cap we are not the very button.[777][778]           225

    _Ham._ Nor the soles of her shoe?[779]

    _Ros._ Neither, my lord.

    _Ham._ Then you live about her waist, or in the middle[780]
    of her favours?[781]

    _Guil._ Faith, her privates we.[782]                             230

    _Ham._ In the secret parts of Fortune? O, most true;
    she is a strumpet. What's the news?[783]

    _Ros._ None, my lord, but that the world's grown honest.[784]

    _Ham._ Then is doomsday near: but your news is not[785]
    true. Let me question more in particular: what have you,[786]    235
    my good friends, deserved at the hands of Fortune, that she[786]
    sends you to prison hither?[786]

    _Guil._ Prison, my lord![786]

    _Ham._  Denmark's a prison.[786]

    _Ros._  Then is the world one.[786]                              240

    _Ham._ A goodly one; in which there are many confines,[786]
    wards and dungeons, Denmark being one o' the worst.[786][787]

    _Ros._  We think not so, my lord.[786]

    _Ham._ Why, then 'tis none to you; for there is nothing[786][788]
    either good or bad, but thinking makes it so: to me it is a[786][788]  245
    prison.[786]

    _Ros._ Why, then your ambition makes it one; 'tis too[786]
    narrow for your mind.[786]

    _Ham._  O God, I could be bounded in a nut-shell and[786]
    count myself a king of infinite space, were it not that I[786]   250
    have bad dreams.[786][789]

    _Guil._ Which dreams indeed are ambition; for the very[786]
    substance of the ambitious is merely the shadow of a dream.[786]

    _Ham._  A dream itself is but a shadow.[786]

    _Ros._  Truly, and I hold ambition of so airy and light a[786]   255
    quality that it is but a shadow's shadow.[786]

    _Ham._ Then are our beggars bodies, and our monarchs[786]
    and outstretched heroes the beggars' shadows. Shall we to[786]
    the court? for, by my fay, I cannot reason.[786][790]

    _Ros. Guil._  We'll wait upon you.[786][791]                     260

    _Ham._ No such matter: I will not sort you with the rest[786]
    of my servants; for, to speak to you like an honest man, I[786]
    am most dreadfully attended. But, in the beaten way of[786]
    friendship, what make you at Elsinore?[792][793]

    _Ros._  To visit you, my lord; no other occasion.                265

    _Ham._ Beggar that I am, I am even poor in thanks; but[794]
    I thank you: and sure, dear friends, my thanks are too dear
    a halfpenny. Were you not sent for? Is it your own[795]
    inclining? Is it a free visitation? Come, deal justly with me:[796]
    come, come; nay, speak.                                          270

    _Guil._  What should we say, my lord?

    _Ham._ Why, any thing, but to the purpose. You were[797]
    sent for; and there is a kind of confession in your looks,[798]
    which your modesties have not craft enough to colour: I
    know the good king and queen have sent for you.                  275

    _Ros._  To what end, my lord?

    _Ham._ That you must teach me. But let me conjure you,
    by the rights of our fellowship, by the consonancy of our[799]
    youth, by the obligation of our ever-preserved love, and by[800]
    what more dear a better proposer could charge you withal, be[801]  280
    even and direct with me, whether you were sent for, or no.[802]

    _Ros._ [_Aside to Guil._] What say you?[803]

    _Ham._ [_Aside_] Nay then, I have an eye of you.--If you[804][805]
    love me, hold not off.[804]

    _Guil._  My lord, we were sent for.                              285

    _Ham._ I will tell you why; so shall my anticipation prevent
    your discovery, and your secrecy to the king and queen[806][807]
    moult no feather. I have of late--but wherefore I know not--lost[807][808]
    all my mirth, foregone all custom of exercises; and indeed[809]
    it goes so heavily with my disposition that this goodly[810]     290
    frame, the earth, seems to me a sterile promontory; this most
    excellent canopy, the air, look you, this brave o'erhanging[811]
    firmament, this majestical roof fretted with golden fire, why,[812]
    it appears no other thing to me than a foul and pestilent[813]
    congregation of vapours. What a piece of work is a man![814]     295
    how noble in reason! how infinite in faculty! in form and[815][816]
    moving how express and admirable! in action how like an[816]
    angel! in apprehension how like a god! the beauty of the[816]
    world! the paragon of animals! And yet, to me, what is this
    quintessence of dust? man delights not me; no, nor woman[817]    300
    neither, though by your smiling you seem to say so.[818]

    _Ros._ My lord, there was no such stuff in my thoughts.

    _Ham._ Why did you laugh then, when I said 'man[819]
    delights not me'?

    _Ros._ To think, my lord, if you delight not in man, what        305
    lenten entertainment the players shall receive from you:[820]
    we coted them on the way; and hither are they coming, to[821]
    offer you service.

    _Ham._ He that plays the king shall be welcome; his
    majesty shall have tribute of me; the adventurous knight[822]    310
    shall use his foil and target; the lover shall not sigh gratis;[823]
    the humourous man shall end his part in peace; the clown[824]
    shall make those laugh whose lungs are tickled o' the sere,[824][825]
    and the lady shall say her mind freely, or the blank verse[826]
    shall halt for't. What players are they?                         315

    _Ros._  Even those you were wont to take such delight[827]
    in, the tragedians of the city.[828]

    _Ham._  How chances it they travel? their residence,[829]
    both in reputation and profit, was better both ways.[830]

    _Ros._ I think their inhibition comes by the means of the[831][832]  320
    late innovation.[831][833]

    _Ham._ Do they hold the same estimation they did when[834]
    I was in the city? are they so followed?

    _Ros._  No, indeed, are they not.[835]

    _Ham._  How comes it? do they grow rusty?[836]                   325

    _Ros._ Nay, their endeavour keeps in the wonted pace:[836]
    but there is, sir, an eyrie of children, little eyases, that cry[836][837]
    out on the top of question and are most tyranically clapped[836][838]
    for't: these are now the fashion, and so berattle the common[836][839]
    stages--so they call them--that many wearing rapiers[836][840]   330
    are afraid of goose-quills, and dare scarce come thither.[836]

    _Ham._ What, are they children? who maintains 'em?[836][841]
    how are they escoted? Will they pursue the quality no[836]
    longer than they can sing? will they not say afterwards, if[836]
    they should grow themselves to common players,--as it is[836][842]  335
    most like, if their means are no better,--their writers do them[836][843]
    wrong, to make them exclaim against their own succession?[836][844]

    _Ros._  Faith, there has been much to do on both sides,[836]
    and the nation holds it no sin to tarre them to controversy:[836]
    there was for a while no money bid for argument unless[836]      340
    the poet and the player went to cuffs in the question.[836]

    _Ham._ Is't possible?[836]

    _Guil._ O, there has been much throwing about of brains.[836]

    _Ham._ Do the boys carry it away?[836]

    _Ros._ Ay, that they do, my lord; Hercules and his load too.[836][845]  345

    _Ham._ It is not very strange; for my uncle is king of[846]
    Denmark, and those that would make mows at him while[847]
    my father lived, give twenty, forty, fifty, a hundred ducats[848]
    a-piece, for his picture in little. 'Sblood, there is something[849]
    in this more than natural, if philosophy could find it out.[850]  350

                                         [_Flourish of trumpets within._

    _Guil._ There are the players.[851]

    _Ham._ Gentlemen, you are welcome to Elsinore. Your[793]
    hands, come then: the appurtenance of welcome is fashion[852]
    and ceremony: let me comply with you in this garb, lest[853][854]
    my extent to the players, which, I tell you, must show[854][855]  355
    fairly outwards, should more appear like entertainment[856]
    than yours. You are welcome: but my uncle-father and
    aunt-mother are deceived.

    _Guil._ In what, my dear lord?

    _Ham._ I am but mad north-north-west: when the wind              360
    is southerly I know a hawk from a handsaw.[857]

                           _Enter_ POLONIUS.

    _Pol._ Well be with you, gentlemen![858]

    _Ham._ Hark you, Guildenstern; and you too: at each[859]
    ear a hearer: that great baby you see there is not yet out[860]
    of his swaddling clouts.[861]                                    365

    _Ros._ Happily he's the second time come to them; for[862]
    they say an old man is twice a child.

    _Ham._ I will prophesy he comes to tell me of the[863]
    players; mark it. You say right, sir: o'Monday morning;[864]
    'twas so, indeed.[865]                                           370

    _Pol._ My lord, I have news to tell you.

    _Ham._ My lord, I have news to tell you. When Roscius[866]
    was an actor in Rome,--[867]

    _Pol._ The actors are come hither, my lord.

    _Ham._ Buz, buz!                                                 375

    _Pol._ Upon my honour,--[868]

    _Ham._ Then came each actor on his ass,--[869]

    _Pol._ The best actors in the world, either for tragedy,
    comedy, history, pastoral, pastoral-comical, historical-pastoral,[870]
    tragical-historical, tragical-comical-historical-pastoral,[870][871]  380
    scene individable, or poem unlimited: Seneca cannot be too[872]
    heavy, nor Plautus too light. For the law of writ and the[873][874][875]
    liberty these are the only men.[873][875]

    _Ham._  O Jephthah, judge of Israel, what a treasure[876][877]
    hadst thou!                                                      385

    _Pol._  What a treasure had he, my lord?[878]

    _Ham._  Why,[879]
    'One fair daughter, and no more,[879]
      The which he loved passing well.'[879]

    _Pol._ [_Aside_] Still on my daughter.[880]                      390

    _Ham._  Am I not i' the right, old Jephthah?

    _Pol._  If you call me Jephthah, my lord, I have a daughter[881][882]
    that I love passing well.[881]

    _Ham._  Nay, that follows not.[881]

    _Pol._  What follows, then, my lord?                             395

    _Ham._  Why,[883]
                      'As by lot, God wot,'[883]
    and then, you know,[884]
                'It came to pass, as most like it was,'--[884]
    the first row of the pious chanson will show you more;[885]      400
    for look, where my abridgement comes.[886]

                     _Enter four or five_ Players.

    You are welcome, masters; welcome, all. I am glad to see[887]
    thee well. Welcome, good friends. O, my old friend! Why[888][889]
    thy face is valanced since I saw thee last; comest thou to[889][890]
    beard me in Denmark? What, my young lady and mistress!           405
    By'r lady, your ladyship is nearer to heaven than[891]
    when I saw you last, by the altitude of a chopine. Pray[892]
    God, your voice, like a piece of uncurrent gold, be not
    cracked within the ring. Masters, you are all welcome.
    We'll e'en to 't like French falconers, fly at any thing we[893]  410
    see: we'll have a speech straight: come, give us a taste of
    your quality; come, a passionate speech.

    _First Play._ What speech, my good lord?[894][895]

    _Ham._ I heard thee speak me a speech once, but it was
    never acted; or, if it was, not above once; for the play, I remember,  415
    pleased not the million; 'twas caviare to the general:[896]
    but it was--as I received it, and others, whose judgements[897]
    in such matters cried in the top of mine--an excellent play,
    well digested in the scenes, set down with as much modesty
    as cunning. I remember, one said there were no sallets in[898]   420
    the lines to make the matter savoury, nor no matter in the
    phrase that might indict the author of affection; but called[899]
    it an honest method, as wholesome as sweet, and by very[900]
    much more handsome than fine. One speech in it I chiefly[900][901]
    loved: 'twas Æneas' tale to Dido; and thereabout of it especially,[902]  425
    where he speaks of Priam's slaughter: if it live in[903]
    your memory, begin at this line; let me see, let me see;
          'The rugged Pyrrhus, like th' Hyrcanian beast,'--[904]
    It is not so: it begins with 'Pyrrhus.'[905]
          'The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose sable arms,                  430
          Black as his purpose, did the night resemble[906]
          When he lay couched in the ominous horse,[907]
          Hath now this dread and black complexion smear'd[908]
          With heraldry more dismal: head to foot[909]
          Now is he total gules; horridly trick'd[910]               435
          With blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons,
          Baked and impasted with the parching streets,[911]
          That lend a tyrannous and a damned light[912][913]
          To their lord's murder: roasted in wrath and fire,[913][914]
          And thus o'er-sized with coagulate gore,[915]              440
          With eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus[916]
          Old grandsire Priam seeks.'
    So, proceed you.[917]

    _Pol_ 'Fore God, my lord, well spoken, with good accent
    and good discretion.                                             445

    _First Play._        'Anon he finds him[894]
    Striking too short at Greeks; his antique sword,[918]
    Rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls,[919]
    Repugnant to command: unequal match'd,[920]
    Pyrrhus at Priam drives; in rage strikes wide;                   450
    But with the whiff and wind of his fell sword
    The unnerved father falls. Then senseless Ilium,[921]
    Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top[922]
    Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash[923]
    Takes prisoner Pyrrhus' ear: for, lo! his sword,[924]            455
    Which was declining on the milky head
    Of reverend Priam, seem'd i' the air to stick:[925]
    So, as a painted tyrant, Pyrrhus stood.[926]
    And like a neutral to his will and matter,[927][928]
    Did nothing.[928]                                                460
    But as we often see, against some storm,
    A silence in the heavens, the rack stand still,[929]
    The bold winds speechless and the orb below[930]
    As hush as death, anon the dreadful thunder
    Doth rend the region, so after Pyrrhus' pause[924][931]          465
    Aroused vengeance sets him new a-work;[932]
    And never did the Cyclops' hammers fall[933]
    On Mars's armour, forged for proof eterne,[934]
    With less remorse than Pyrrhus' bleeding sword[924]
    Now falls on Priam.                                              470
    Out, out, thou strumpet, Fortune! All you gods,[935]
    In general synod take away her power,
    Break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel,[936]
    And bowl the round nave down the hill of heaven
    As low as to the fiends!'                                        475

    _Pol._ This is too long.[937]

    _Ham._ It shall to the barber's, with your beard. Prithee,[938]
    say on: he's for a jig or a tale of bawdry, or he sleeps:
    say on: come to Hecuba.

    _First Play._ 'But who, O, who had seen the mobled
              queen--'[939][940][941]                                480

    _Ham._ 'The mobled queen?'[940][942]

    _Pol._ That's good; 'mobled queen' is good.[943]

    _First Play._ 'Run barefoot up and down, threatening the flames[944]
    With bisson rheum; a clout upon that head[945]
    Where late the diadem stood; and for a robe,                     485
    About her lank and all o'er-teemed loins,
    A blanket, in the alarm of fear caught up:[946]
    Who this had seen, with tongue in venom steep'd
    'Gainst Fortune's state would treason have pronounced:[947]
    But if the gods themselves did see her then,                     490
    When she saw Pyrrhus make malicious sport
    In mincing with his sword her husband's limbs,[948]
    The instant burst of clamour that she made,
    Unless things mortal move them not at all,[949]
    Would have made milch the burning eyes of heaven[950]            495
    And passion in the gods.'[951]

    _Pol._  Look, whether he has not turned his colour and[952]
    has tears in's eyes. Prithee, no more.[953]

    _Ham._ 'Tis well; I'll have thee speak out the rest of this[954]
    soon. Good my lord, will you see the players well bestowed?[955]  500
    Do you hear, let them be well used, for they are the abstract[956]
    and brief chronicles of the time: after your death you were
    better have a bad epitaph than their ill report while you live.[957]

    _Pol._  My lord, I will use them according to their desert.[958]

    _Ham._  God's bodykins, man, much better: use every[959]         505
    man after his desert, and who shall 'scape whipping? Use[958][960]
    them after your own honour and dignity: the less they deserve,
    the more merit is in your bounty. Take them in.

    _Pol._  Come, sirs.

    _Ham._ Follow him, friends: we'll hear a play to-morrow.         510

               [_Exit Polonius with all the Players but the First._[961]

    Dost thou hear me, old friend; can you play the Murder of[962]
    Gonzago?[963]

    _First Play._ Ay, my lord.

    _Ham._ We'll ha't to-morrow night. You could, for a[961][964][965]
    need, study a speech of some dozen or sixteen lines, which[965][966]  515
    I would set down and insert in't, could you not?[967]

    _First Play._ Ay, my lord.

    _Ham._ Very well. Follow that lord; and look you[961]
    mock him not. [_Exit First Player._] My good friends, I'll[968]
    leave you till night: you are welcome to Elsinore.[969]          520

    _Ros._ Good my lord![970]

    _Ham._ Ay, so, God be wi' ye! [_Exeunt Rosencrantz and
            Guildenstern._] Now I am alone.[971]
    O, what a rogue and peasant slave am I!
    Is it not monstrous that this player here,
    But in a fiction, in a dream of passion,[972]                    525
    Could force his soul so to his own conceit[973]
    That from her working all his visage wann'd;[974]
    Tears in his eyes, distraction in's aspect,[975]
    A broken voice, and his whole function suiting[976]
    With forms to his conceit? and all for nothing![977]             530
    For Hecuba![978]
    What's Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba,[979]
    That he should weep for her? What would he do,
    Had he the motive and the cue for passion[980]
    That I have? He would drown the stage with tears                 535
    And cleave the general ear with horrid speech,
    Make mad the guilty and appal the free,[981]
    Confound the ignorant, and amaze indeed
    The very faculties of eyes and ears.[982][983]
    Yet I,[982][984][985]                                            540
    A dull and muddy-mettled rascal, peak,[984][985][986]
    Like John-a-dreams, unpregnant of my cause,[985][987]
    And can say nothing; no, not for a king,[985]
    Upon whose property and most dear life
    A damn'd defeat was made. Am I a coward?[988]                    545
    Who calls me villain? breaks my pate across?[988]
    Plucks off my beard, and blows it in my face?[988]
    Tweaks me by the nose? gives me the lie i' the throat,[988]
    As deep as to the lungs? who does me this?[988]
    Ha![989]                                                         550
    'Swounds, I should take it: for it cannot be[990]
    But I am pigeon-liver'd and lack gall
    To make oppression bitter, or ere this[991]
    I should have fatted all the region kites[992]
    With this slave's offal: bloody, bawdy villain![993]             555
    Remorseless, treacherous, lecherous, kindless villain![994]
    O, vengeance![995]
    Why, what an ass am I! This is most brave,[996]
    That I, the son of a dear father murder'd,[997]
    Prompted to my revenge by heaven and hell,                       560
    Must, like a whore, unpack my heart with words,
    And fall a-cursing, like a very drab,[998][999]
    A scullion![998][999]
    Fie upon't! foh! About, my brain! Hum, I have heard[998][1000]
    That guilty creatures, sitting at a play,[998][1001]             565
    Have by the very cunning of the scene
    Been struck so to the soul that presently[1002]
    They have proclaim'd their malefactions;
    For murder, though it have no tongue, will speak
    With most miraculous organ. I'll have these players[1003]        570
    Play something like the murder of my father
    Before mine uncle: I'll observe his looks;
    I'll tent him to the quick: if he but blench,[1004]
    I know my course. The spirit that I have seen[1005]
    May be the devil; and the devil hath power[1006]                 575
    To assume a pleasing shape; yea, and perhaps
    Out of my weakness and my melancholy,
    As he is very potent with such spirits,
    Abuses me to damn me. I'll have grounds
    More relative than this. The play's the thing                    580
    Wherein I'll catch the conscience of the king.              [_Exit._

FOOTNOTES:

[560] ACT II. SCENE I.] Q (1676) and Rowe. Actus Secundus. Ff.

A room ...] An Apartment ... Rowe.

Enter ... Reynaldo.] Capell. Enter old Polonius, with his man or two.
Qq. Enter ... Reynoldo. Ff.

[561] _this_] Qq. _his_ Ff.

_these_] Q₂ Q₃ F₁. _these two_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆. _those_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[562] _Reynaldo_] Qq. _Reynoldo_ Ff.

[563] _marvellous_] Q₅ Q₆. _meruiles_ Q₂ Q₃. _maruelous_ Q₄. _maruels_
F₁. _marvels_ F₂ F₃ F₄.]

_wisely,_] Q₆. _wisely_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _wisely:_ Ff.

[564] _to make inquire_] Qq. _you make inquiry_ Ff. _make you inquiry_
Rowe. _to make inquiry_ Q (1676) and Pope.

[565] _Marry ... sir,_] As in Qq. Two lines in Ff.

_Marry_] _Mary_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄.

[566] _Danskers_] _Dantz'ckers_ Capell (corrected in MS.)

[567] _at_] om. F₄.

[568] _nearer Than_] Capell. _neerer Then_ Qq F₁. _neere Than_ F₂.
_near Then_ F₃. _near. Then_ Q (1676) and Pope. _near, Then_ F₄.

[569] _As_] Qq. _And_ Ff.

[570] _if't_] Ff. _y'ft_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _if it_ Q₆.

[571] _Ay ... far._] Arranged as in Capell. In Qq Ff the first line
ends at _swearing._

[572] _fencing_] Put in brackets by Warburton as an interpolation.

[573] _no_] Ff. om. Qq.

[574] _another_] _an utter_ Hanmer (Theobald conj. withdrawn).

[575] _That_] _Than_ Keightley.

[576] _A savageness ... assault._] As in Qq. One line in Ff.

[577] _unreclaimed_] Q₅ Q₆. _unreclamed_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _unreclaim'd_ Ff.

[578] _lord,--_] _lord--_ Pope. _Lord._ Qq Ff.

[579] _Ay, ... that._] As in Steevens (1778). One line in Qq Ff.

[580] _lord_] _good lord_ Capell, ending the line at _lord._

[581] _warrant_] Ff. _wit_ Qq.

[582] _sullies_] Q₄ Q₅ Q₆ F₄. _sallies_ Q₂ Q₃. _sulleyes_ F₁ F₂ F₃.

[583] _i' the_] _i' th'_ Ff. _with_ Qq.

[584] _Mark ... sound,_] As in Malone. One line in Qq Ff.

[585] _you,_] Qq. _you_ Ff.

[586] _him_] _he_ Q₆.

_you would_] _you'ld_ Johnson.

[587] _seen in_] _seene in_ Qq. _seene._ _In_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _seen. In_ F₄.

_prenominate_] _prenominate_] Q₂ Q₃ Q₄.

[588] _breathe_] Rowe (ed. 2). _breath_ Qq Ff. _speak_ Pope.

[589] _consequence_] _cosequence_ Q₄.

[590] _or so_] Put in parentheses in Qq.

_or so, or_] _or Sir, or_ Hanmer. _or sire or_ Warburton. _forsooth,
or_ Johnson conj. _or so forth,_ Steevens conj. (1778).

[591] _or_] Qq. _and_ Ff.

_addition_] _addistion_ Q₂ Q₃.

[592] _And then ... leave?_] Prose first by Malone. Three lines in
Qq, ending _say?... something, ... leave?_ Three lines in Ff, ending
_this?... say? ... leave?_ Capell ends the lines _was I ... say ...
leave?_

[593] _does he this--he does_] _does he this? He does:_ Ff. _doos a
this, a doos,_ Q₂ Q₃. _doos a this, a doos:_ Q₄ Q₅. _does a this, a
does:_ Q₆.

[594] _By the mass_] Qq. Omitted in Ff.

_something_] _nothing_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[595] _At ... gentleman.'_] Prose in Globe ed. Two lines, the first
ending _consequence:_ in Ff.

_at 'friend ... gentleman.'_] Omitted in Qq.

[596] Pol.] Reynol. F₂. Pelon. F₃.

[597] _closes with you thus_] Ff. _closes thus_ Qq. _closeth with him
thus_ (Q₁).

[598] _t'other_] _tother_ F₁ F₂. _'tother_ F₃ F₄. _th' other_ Qq.

[599] _Or then, or then,_] _Or then,_ Pope.

_or such_] Qq. _and such_ Ff.

[600] _a'_] _a_ Qq. _he_ Ff.

_gaming, there_] _gaming, there_ Ff. _gaming there_ Qq.

_o'ertook_] _or tooke_ Qq.

[601] _There_] _Their_ F₂ F₃.

[602] _such_] Q₂ Q₃ Ff. _such or such_ Q₄ Q₅. _such and such_ Q₆.

_sale_] Qq. _saile_ F₁ F₂. _sail_ F₃ F₄.

[603] _Videlicet ... now_] As in Capell. One line in Qq Ff.

[604] _falsehood takes_] _falshood takes_ Q₆. _falshood, takes_ Ff.
_falshood take_ Q₂ Q₃. _falshood: take_ Q₄ Q₅.

_carp_] _carpe_ Qq. _cape_ Ff.

[605] _assays_] _essayes_ Q₆.

[606] _indirections_] _indirects_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

[607] _advice_] Ff Q₆. _advise_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.

[608] _be wi' ye_] _buy ye_ Qq. _buy you_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _b'w'you_ F₄.

_fare ye_] Q₆. _far ye_ Q₂ Q₃. _far yee_?] Q₄ Q₅. _fare you_ Ff.

[609] _Good my lord!_] Dyce. _Good my Lord._ Qq Ff. _Good my Lord--_
Rowe. _But, my good lord,--_ Capell conj.

[610] _in_] _e'en_ Hanmer.

[611] [Exit Reynaldo.] Exit Rey. Qq (after _lord_). Exit. Ff (after
_lord_).

SCENE II.] Pope.

[Enter Ophelia.] As in Singer (ed. 2). Before _Farewell!_ in Qq Ff.
Enter Ophelia, hastily. Capell.

[612] _O, my lord,_] Qq. _Alas,_ Ff.

[613] _i' the_] _i' th_ Qq. _in the_ Ff.

_God_] Qq. _Heaven_ Ff.

[614] _sewing_] Warburton. _sowing_ Qq Ff. _reading_ Q (1676).

_closet_] Q₆. _closset_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _chamber_ Ff.

[615] _Lord_] _Prince_ Q (1676).

[616] _foul'd_] Ff Q₆. _fouled_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _loose_ Q (1676). See note
(XI).

[617] _down-gyved_] F₃ F₄. _downe gyved_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₆. _downe gyred_ Q₄ Q₅.
_downe gived_ F₁. _downe-gyved_ F₂. _down-gyred_ Theobald.

[618] _horrors, he_] Qq. _horrors: he_ Ff. _horrors: thus he_ Pope.
_horrors there, he_ Anon. conj.

[619] _My lord ... it._] As in Qq. One line in Ff.

[620] _and held me hard_] Omitted in F₂ F₃ F₄.

[621] _As he_] Ff. _As a_ Qq.

_Long_] _Long time_ Pope.

[622] _mine_] Qq F₁. _my_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _his_ Pope (ed. 2).

[623] _piteous_] Q₆. _pittious_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅ F₁. _hideous_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[624] _As_] Qq. _That_ Ff.

[625] _that done,_] _Then_ Pope.

_me_] om. F₂ F₃ F₄.

[626] _shoulder_] Q₂ Q₃. _shoulders_ The rest.

[627] _o'doors_] Theobald. _adoores_ Q₂ Q₃. _a doores_ Q₄. _of doores_
Q₅ Q₆. _adores_ F₁ F₂. _adoors_ F₃ F₄.

_helps_] Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _helpes_ Q₅ Q₆. _helpe_ (Q₁) F₁ F₂. _help_ F₃ F₄.

[628] _Come_] Qq. om. Ff.

[629] _fordoes_] _forgoes_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

[630] _passion_] Ff. _passions_ Qq.

[631] _I am_] _I'm_ Pope.

_heed_] Q₅ Q₆. _heede_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _speed_ Ff.

[632] _quoted_] Ff. _coted_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _coated_ Q₆. _noted_ Warburton.

_fear'd_] Qq. _feare_ F₁ F₂. _fear_ F₃ F₄.

_did but trifle_] _trifl'd_ Pope.

[633] _wreck_] _wrack_ Qq F₃ F₄. _wracke_ F₁ F₂. _rack_ Upton conj.

_beshrew_] Ff Q₆. _beshrow_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.

[634] _By heaven,_] (Q₁) Qq. _It seemes_ F₁ F₂. _It seems_ F₃ F₄.

[635] _we_] _with me_ Q (1676).

[636] _which_] _wͨ_ F₁.

[637] _than hate_] _hate, than_ Hanmer. _than haste_ Anon. conj.

[638] _Come._] Qq. om. Ff.

[639] SCENE II.] Scena secunda. Ff. SCENE III. Pope.

A room....] Capell. The Palace. Rowe.

Flourish.] om. Ff.

Rosencratz,] Malone. Rossencraft, (Q₁). Rosencraus Qq. Rosincrane,
F₁. Rosincrosse, F₂ F₃. Rosincross, F₄. Roseneraus, Rowe (ed. 2).
Rosincrantz, Theobald.

Guildenstern] Rowe. Gilderstone (Q₁). Guyldensterne Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.
Guildensterne F₁ Q₆. Guildenstare F₂ F₃ F₄.

and Attendants.] Lords and other Attendants. Rowe. Omitted in Qq.
Cumalijs. F₁ F₂. cum aliis. F₃ F₄.

[640] _Rosencrantz_] Malone. _Rosencraus_ Qq. _Rosincrance_ F₁.
_Rosincros_ F₂. _Rosincross_ F₃ F₄.

[641] _Guildenstern_] Rowe. _Guyldensterne_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.
_Guildensterne_ F₁ Q₆. _Guildenstare_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[642] _have you_] _you have_ Q₆.

[643] _call_] Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _I call_ Ff Q₆.

[644] _Sith nor_] Qq. _Since not_ Ff.

[645] _dream_] _dreame_ Qq. _deeme_ F₁ F₂. _deem_ F₃ F₄.

[646] _sith_] Qq. _since_ Ff.

_neighbour_'d] Ff. _nabored_ Q₂ Q₃. _neighbored_ Q₄. _neighboured_ Q₅
Q₆.

_haviour_] Q₅ Q₆. _hauior_ Q₂ Q₃. _hau r_ Q₄. _humour_ Ff. _'havour_
Warburton.

[647] _occasion_] Qq. _occasions_ Ff.

[648] _Whether ... thus,_] Qq. Omitted in Ff. _If ... thus,_ Rowe.

[649] _open'd_] om. Q (1676).

[650] _are_] _is_ Q₂ Q₃.

[651] _gentry_] _gentleness_ Q (1676).

[652] _expend_] _extend_ Q₄ Q₅. _employ_ Q (1676).

[653] _shall_] _should_ Q₆.

[654] _of us_] _over us_ Q (1676). _o'er us_ Mason conj.

[655] _to_] _into_ Keightley.

_But we_] Qq. _We_ Ff.

[656] _service_] Qq. _services_ Ff.

[657] _To be commanded._] Omitted in Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

[658] _My ... you,_] As in Qq. Two lines in Ff.

_you_] Qq. _ye_ Ff.

[659] _these_] Qq. _the_ Ff.

[660] _Ay,_] Capell. _I_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. om. Ff Q₆. _Amen,_ Keightley.

[Exeunt Rosencrantz....] Exeunt Ros. and Gui., Attendants with them.
Capell. Exeunt Ros. and Guyld. Qq. Exit. F₁ (after _him_). Exeunt. F₂
F₃ F₄ (after _him_).

[661] [Aside to the King. Anon. conj.

_I assure_] Qq. _Assure you,_ Ff.

[662] _and_] Qq. _one_ Ff.

[663] _sure_] _be sure_ F₃ F₄.

[664] _it hath_] Qq. _I have_ Ff.

[665] _that; that_] Capell. _that, that_ Qq Ff.

_do I_] _doe I_ Qq. _I do_ F₁ F₃ F₄. _I doe._ F₂.

[666] _fruit_] Q₅ Q₆. _fruite_ Q₂ Q₃. _frute_ Q₄. _newes_ F₁ F₂. _news_
F₃ F₄. _nuts_ Hunter conj.

_to_] _of_ Johnson.

[667] [Exit Polonius.] Ex. Pol. Rowe. Omitted in Qq Ff.

[668] _my dear Gertrude_] Capell. _my deere Gertrard_ Q₂ Q₃. _my
decree: Gertrud_ Q₄ Q₅. _my deare Gertrud_ Q₆. _my sweet queene, that_
Ff (_queen_ F₃ F₄).

[669] _o'erhasty_] _hastie_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₅ Q₆. _hasty_ Q₄.

[670] SCENE IV. Pope.

Re-enter Polonius....] Theobald. Enter Polonius, Voltimand, and
Cornelius. Ff (Voltumand, F₁), after line 57. Enter Embassadors. Qq,
after line 57.

_Welcome, my_] _Welcome home,_ S. Walker conj.

_my_] Qq. om. Ff.

[671] _Voltimand_] F₂ F₃ F₄. _Voltemand_ Qq. _Voltumand_ F₁.

[672] _levies_] _lives_ Q (1695).

[673] _Polack_] _Polacke_ (Q₁). _Pollacke_ Qq. _Poleak_ F₁. _Polak_ F₂
F₃ F₄.

[674] _three_] (Q₁) Ff. _threescore_ Qq.

[675] _shown_] _shone_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.

[Giving a paper.] Malone. om. Qq Ff. Letter. Collier MS. See note (II).

[676] _this_] Qq. _his_ Ff. _that_ (Q₁).

[677] _therein_] _herein_ Q₆.

[678] _consider'd_] Ff. _considered_ Qq.

[679] _Answer, and think upon_] _And think upon an answer to_ Hanmer.

_And think upon and answer_ Anon. conj. (Misc. Obs. on Hamlet, 1752).

[680] _thank_] _take_ F₁.

_well-took_] _well-look't_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _well-luck'd_ Theobald conj.
(withdrawn).

[681] [Exeunt Vol. and Cor.] Capell. Exeunt Embassadors. Qq. Exit
Ambass. Ff.

_well_] Qq. _very well_ Ff.

[682] _since_] Ff. om. Qq.

_brevity is_] _brevity's_ Pope.

[683] _limbs_] _lines_ Theobald. conj. (withdrawn).

[684] _it:_] _it?_ Q (1676).

[685] _mad?_] Q₄ Q₅ Q₆. _mad,_ Q₂ Q₃. _mad._ Ff.

[686] _he is_] Ff. _hee's_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₆. _he's_ Q₅.

_mad, 'tis_] _mad, is_ Capell.

[687] _'tis 'tis_] _it is_ Ff. _it is, 'tis_ Hanmer.

[688] _farewell it_] _farewell, wit_ Anon. conj.

[689] _the_] _the the_ F₂.

[690] _remains ... Perpend._] _remains: remainder thus perpend._ Maginn
conj.

[691] _thus._] Ff Q₆. _thus_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.

[692] _Perpend._] A separate line in Qq. Ending line 104 in Ff.
_Consider._ Q (1676).

[693] _while_] (Q₁) Qq. _whil'st_ F₁ F₃ F₄. _whilst_ F₂.

[694] [Reads.] Q (1676). The Letter. Ff. om. Qq. He opens a Letter, and
reads. Rowe.

[695] _and_] om. Q₆.

_idol_] _fair idol_ Capell, reading as verse.

_beautified_] _beatified_ Theobald.

[696] _vile_] Qq F₄. _vilde_ F₁ F₂ F₃.

_beautified_] _that beatify'd_ Capell, reading as verse.

_vile_] Qq F₄. _vilde_ F₁ F₂ F₃.

[697] _Thus: ... these,' &c._] See note (XII).

[698] [Reads.] Dyce. om. Qq Ff.

[699] _excellent white_] _excellent-white_ Dyce, ed. 2 (S. Walker
conj.)]

_&c._] Qq. om. Ff.

[700] [Reads.] Reading. Rowe. Letter. Qq. om. Ff.

[701] _HAMLET._] See note (XIII).

[702] _shown_] _showne_ Qq. _shew'd_ Ff.

[703] _above_] F₂ F₃ F₄. _aboue_ F₁. _about_ Qq.

_above, hath_] _about have_ Q₆. _concerning_ Q (1676).

_solicitings_] Qq. _soliciting_ Ff.

[704] _But ... love?_] As in Capell. One line in Qq Ff.

[705] _think,_] Capell. _thinke_ Qq. _think?_ Ff.

[706] _this_] _his_ F₃ F₄.

_wing,--_] _wing,_ Q₂ Q₃ Ff Q₆. _wing?_ Q₄ Q₅.

[707] _your_] _you_ F₂.

[708] _play'd_] _ply'd_ Keightley conj.

[709] _a winking_] Ff Q₆. _a working_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _working_ Pope.

[710] _my young mistress_] Put in parentheses in F₁.

_thus_] _this_ Q₄ Q₅.

[711] _prince, out_] _prince:--out_ Steevens.

_out of thy star_] Q₂ Q₃. _out of thy starre_ Q₄ Q₅ F₁. _out of your
starre_ (Q₁). _out of thy sphere_ F₂ Q₆ F₃ F₄. _above thy sphere_ Q
(1676).

_out of thy star_] _out of thy soar_ Bailey conj.

[712] _prescripts_] Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _precepts_ Ff Q₆.

[713] _his_] Q₄ Q₅ Ff Q₆. _her_ Q₂ Q₃.

[714] _she took ... And he_] _see too ... For, he_ Warburton.

[715] _repulsed, a_] F₂ F₃ F₄. _repulsed._ _A_ F₁. _repell'd, a_ Q₂ Q₃
Q₆. _repel'd. a_ Q₄. _repel'd,_ a Q₅. _repelled, a_ Jennens.

[716] _Fell into_] _Fell to_ Pope.

[717] _watch_] _wath_ Q₂ Q₃. _watching_ Pope. _watch; and_ Keightley.

_thence into_] _then into_ Q (1676). _and thence into_ Maginn conj.

[718] _into a weakness, Thence to_] _to a weakness; thence Into_ S.
Walker conj.

[719] _a_] om. Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.

[720] _wherein_] Qq. _whereon_ Ff.

[721] _all we mourn_] _all we mourne_ Qq. _all we wail_ Ff. _we all
wail_ Collier MS.

[722] _this_] Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _'tis this_ Ff Q₆.

_like_] Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _likely_ Ff Q₆.

[723] _I'ld_] _I'de_ Ff. _I would_ Qq.

[724] [Pointing ... shoulder] Pope, ed. 2 (Theobald). om. Qq Ff.

_this, if ... otherwise:_] _this, if ... otherwise;_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.
_this; if ... otherwise,_ F₁. _this, if ... otherwise,_ F₂ Q₆ F₃ F₄.

[725] _further_] _farther_ Collier.

[726] _You ... lobby._] As in Qq. Three lines, ending _sometimes ...
heere ... lobby,_ in Ff.

[727] _four_] F₃ F₄. _foure_ The rest. _for_ Hanmer.

[728] _does_] Q₄ Q₅ Q₆. _dooes_ Q₂ Q₃. _ha's_ F₁. _has_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[729] _an arras_] _the arras_ Q₆.

_Be ... then;_] _Let ... then_ Anon. conj. (Misc. Obs. on Hamlet, 1752).

[730] _arras then; Mark_] _arras then, Marke_ Qq Ff (_Mark_ F₄).
_arras; then Mark_ Staunton. _arras then To mark_ Keightley.

[731] _But_] Qq. _And_ Ff.

_and_] _of_ Q (1703).

[732] SCENE V. Pope.

_But ... reading._] One line in Qq. Two, the first ending _wretch,_ in
Ff.

[733] _you, both_] Ff. _you both_ Qq. _you both,_ Anon. conj.

[734] [Exeunt.... Enter....] See note (XIV).

[735] _Well, God-a-mercy._] _Excellent well._ Q (1676).

[736] _Excellent_] Qq. _Excellent, excellent_ Ff.

_you are_] Qq. _y'are_ Ff. _you're_ Dyce.

[737] _lord!_] _lord?_ Ff Q₆. _lord._ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.

[738] _Ay, sir ... thousand._] Prose in Ff. Two lines, the first ending
_goes,_ in Qq.

[739] _man_] om. F₃ F₄.

_ten_] Q₅ Q₆. _tenne_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _two_ Ff.

[740] Ham.] Ham. [reads]. Staunton.

[741] _god kissing carrion_] Hanmer (Warburton). _good kissing carrion_
Qq Ff. _god-kissing carrion_ Malone conj. _good, kissing carrion_
Whiter conj. _carrion-kissing god_ Mitford conj.

_carrion--_] Ff. _carrion._ Qq.

[742] _but as ... conceive,--friend_] Malone. _but as ... conceave,
friend_ Qq. _but not as ... conceive. Friend_ Ff.

[743] _How ... again._] Marked as 'Aside' by Capell.

_Still ... again._] Marked as 'Aside' by Steevens. Verse, Maginn conj.,
ending the lines _on ... first; ... he is ... youth ... love; ...
again._

[744] _at first_] _at the first_ Q (1676).

[745] _he said ... he_] Ff. _a said ... a_ Qq. _but said ... he_ Q
(1676).

[746] _he is ... again._] Marked as 'Aside' by Pope, who reads as three
lines of verse.

[747] _far gone_] Qq. _farre gone, farre gone_ Ff.

[748] _much_] om. Maginn conj.

[749] _lord?_] Ff Q₆. _lord._ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.

[750] _who?_] F₁ Q₆. _who._ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _whom?_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[751] _that you read_] Qq. _you meane_ F₁ F₂. _you mean_ F₃ F₄.

[752] _rogue_] Qq. _slave_ Ff.

[753] _and plum-tree_] Q₅ Q₆. _& plum-tree_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _or plum-tree_ Ff.

[754] _lack_] _lacke_ Qq. _locke_ F₁ F₂. _lock_ F₃ F₄.

_most_] Qq. om. Ff.

[755] _yourself_] _your selfe_ Qq. _you your selfe_ F₁ F₂. _you your
self_ F₃ F₄.

_shall grow old_] Qq. _should be old_ Ff. _shall be as old_ Rowe.
_shall be but as old_ Hanmer. _shall grow as old_ Malone.

[756] [Aside] First marked by Capell.

[757] _Though ... lord?_] Prose in Qq. Three lines, ending
_madnesse, ... walke ... lord?_ in Ff. Two lines of verse, the first
ending _in't,_ in Rowe.

[758] _there is_] _there's_ Rowe.

[759] _grave._] Qq. _grave?_ Ff.

[760] _Indeed ... you._] Prose in Qq. Eleven irregular lines in Ff:
nine in Rowe and Pope.

[761] _that's out of the_] Qq. _that is out oth'_ Ff.

[Aside] Marked first by Capell.

[762] _often madness_] _madness often_ Jennens.

[763] _reason and sanity_] F₂ F₃ F₄. _reason and sanitie_ F₁. _reason
and sanctity_ Qq. _sanity and reason_ Pope.

[764] _so prosperously be_] _so happily be_ Q₆. _be So prosp'rously_
Pope.

[765] _I will_] _I'll_ Pope.

[766] _and suddenly ... him_] Ff. Omitted in Qq.

[767] _My ... humbly_] Ff. _My lord, I will_ Qq.

[768] _sir_] Ff. om. Qq.

[769] _will_] Ff. _will not_ Qq.

[770] _except my life_] Three times in Qq. _except my life, my life._
Ff. _except my life._ Pope. [Aside] _except ... life._ Anon. conj.

[771] _These ... fools!_] _Thou ... fool!_ Maginn conj.

Enter....] As in Capell. Enter Guyldersterne, and Rosencraus. Qq (after
line 214). Enter Rosincran and Guildensterne. F₁. Enter Rosincros and
Guildenstar. F₂ F₃. Enter Rosincros and Guildensterne. F₄ (after line
217 in Ff).

[772] _the Lord_] Qq. _my Lord_ Ff. _lord_ Pope.

[773] SCENE VI. Pope.

[To Polonius] Malone.

[Exit Polonius.] As in Capell. Exit. Pope (after line 217).

[774] _My_] Qq. _Mine_ Ff.

[775] _excellent_] _extent_ Q₂ Q₃. _exelent_ Q₄.

[776] _Ah_] Q₆. _A_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _Oh_ Ff.

_you_] Qq. _ye_ Ff.

[777] _Happy ... button._] Arranged as by Hanmer. Two lines, the first
ending _lap,_ in Qq (_cap_ Q₆). Prose in Ff.

_over-happy; On Fortune's cap we_] Hanmer. _over-happy: on Fortune's
cap, we_ Ff. _ever happy on Fortunes lap, We_ Qq (_cap_ Q₆).

[778] _On_] _Of_ Anon. conj.

[779] _shoe_] _shooes_ Collier MS. See note (II).

_shoe?_] _shoo?_ F₁. _shooe?_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _shooe._ Qq.

[780] _waist_] Johnson. _wast_ Qq. _waste_ Ff.

[781] _favours?_] Pope. _favors._ Qq. _favour?_ Ff.

[782] _her_] _in her_ Pope, ed. 2.

[783] _What's the_] Ff. _What_ Qq.

_news?_] _newes?_ Qq F₁. _newes._ F₂ F₃. _news._ F₄.

[784] _that_] Ff. om. Qq.

[785] _but_] _sure_ Q (1676).

[786] _Let me ... attended._] Ff. Omitted in Qq.

[787] _o' the_] _o' th'_ Ff. _of the_ Capell.

[788] _Why ... so:_] Two lines of verse, the first ending _nothing,_ S.
Walker conj.

[789] _bad_] _had_ Anon. conj.

[790] _fay_] Pope. _fey_ Ff.

[791] Ros. Guil.] Both. Ff.

[792] _friendship,_] Qq F₁. _friendship._ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[793] _Elsinore_] Malone. _Elsonoure_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _Elsonower_ F₁.
_Elsinooer_ F₂. _Elsenour_ Q₆. _Elsinoore_ F₃ F₄.

[794] _even_] Ff Q₆. _ever_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.

[795] _a halfpenny_] _of a halfpenny_ Theobald. _at a halfpenny_ Hanmer.

[796] _Come, deal_] Ff. _come, come, deale_ Qq.

[797] _Why_] Ff. om. Qq.]

_any thing, but_] Q₆. _any thing but_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _any thing. But_ Ff.

_purpose. You_] _purpose you_ Q (1676).

[798] _of_] Qq. om. Ff.

[799] _our fellowship_] _our fellowships_ Q₆. _your fellowship_ F₃ F₄.

[800] _ever-preserved_] _ever preferred_ Q (1676).

[801] _could_] Ff. _can_ Qq.

_charge_] _change_ Q₅.

[802] _no._] Qq Ff. _no?_ Pope.

[803] [Aside to Guil.] Edd. (Globe ed.) To Guilden. Theobald. To
Hamlet. Delius conj.

[804] Ham. _Nay ... off._] Omitted by Jennens.

[805] [Aside] Marked first by Steevens (1793).

_of you.--_] _of you:_ Ff. _of you?_ Q₂ Q₃. _of you,_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆. _on
you_ Harness conj.

[806] _discovery, and_] _discovery of_ Ff.

[807] _and your ... moult_] Qq. _of your ... queene: moult_ Ff. _of
your ... queen. Moult_ Knight.

[808] _feather. I_] _feather: I_ Q₆. _feather, I_ The rest.

[809] _exercises_] Qq. _exercise_ Ff.

[810] _heavily_] Qq. _heavenly_ Ff.

[811] _brave o'erhanging_] _brave-o'erhanging_ S. Walker conj.

_o'erhanging_] _ore-hanged_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆. _o'erchanging_] Jennens.

[812] _firmament_] Qq. Omitted in Ff.

[813] _appears_] _appeares_ F₁. _appeared_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _appeareth_ Qq.

_no other thing to me than_] _nothing to me but_ Qq.

[814] _What a piece_] Ff Q₆. _What peece_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.

_a man_] _man_ Q₆.

[815] _faculty_] Ff. _faculties_ Qq.

[816] _faculty!... god!_] Pointed as in Q₆ and Ff, substantially.
_faculties, in ... mooving, how ... action, how ... apprehension,
how ... God:_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅ (no other stops).

[817] _no_] om. Qq.

_woman_] _women_ Q₂ Q₃.

[818] _seem_] _see me_ F₂.

[819] _you_] Ff. _yee_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _ye_ Q₆.

_then_] Qq. om. Ff.

[820] _lenten_] Q₆. _Lenton_ The rest.

[821] _coted_] Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _coated_ Ff Q₆. _met_ Q (1676). _accosted_
Rowe. _'costed_ Capell. _quoted_ Jennens conj. _escoted_ Staunton conj.

_are they_] _are the_ Q₄ Q₅.

[822] _of me_] Ff Q₆. _on me_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.

[823] _sigh_] _sing_ Q₄ Q₅.

[824] _the clown ... sere,_] Omitted in Qq.

[825] _o' the_] _a' th'_ F₁. _ath'_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

_sere_] _scene_ Malone conj.

[826] _blank_] _black_ Q₂ Q₃.

[827] _such_] Qq. om. Ff.

[828] _in, the_] Qq F₄. _in the_ F₁ F₂ F₃.

[829] _they_] _the_ Q₄ Q₅.

_travel_] Q₆ F₃ F₄. _travaile_ The rest.

[830] _was_] _were_ Anon conj.

[831] _inhibition ... innovation._] _itineration ... innovation._
Theobald conj. (withdrawn). _innovation ... inhibition._ Johnson conj.

[832] _the means_] _means_ Johnson.

[833] _innovation._] _innovation?_ Ff.

[834] _Do they_] _Do the_ Q₄ Q₅.

[835] _are they_] Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _they are_ Ff Q₆.

[836] Ham. _How ... load too._] Omitted in Qq.

[837] _eyrie_] _ayrie_ F₁. _ayry_ F₂. _airy_ F₃ F₄.

_eyases_] Theobald. _Yases_ Ff.

[838] _question_] _the question_ Capell.

[839] _fashion_] _faction_ Hughs.

_berattle_] _be-rattle_ F₃ F₄. _be ratle_ F₂. _be-ratled_ F₁.

[840] _stages_] _stagers_ Theobald conj. (withdrawn).

[841] _'em_] _them_ Capell.

[842] _players,_] _players?_ Pope (ed. 1).

[843] _most like,_] Pope. _like most_ Ff. _like, most,_ Capell. _like
most will,_ Anon. conj.

_no_] _not_ F₂.

_them_] _them on_ Pope (ed. 2).

[844] _succession?_] Pope, ed. 2 (Theobald). _succession_. Ff.

[845] _load_] _club_ Theobald conj. (withdrawn).

[846] _very strange; for_] Q₆. _very strange, for_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.
_strange: for_ F₁. _strange for_ F₂ F₃. _strange, for_ F₄.

_my_] Qq. _mine_ Ff.

[847] _mows_] _mowes_ Ff. _mouths_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _mouthes_ Q₆.

[848] _fifty_] Qq. om. Ff.

_a_] Qq. _an_ Ff.

[849] _'Sblood_] _S'blood_ Q₆. _S'bloud_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. om. Ff.

[850] [Flourish ...] Capell. A Florish. Qq. Flourish for the Players.
Ff.

[851] _There ... players._] _Shall we call the players?_ Q (1676).

[852] _then_] Qq. om. Ff.

_appurtenance_] _apportenance_ Q₄ Q₅.

[853] _comply_] _complement_ Hanmer.

_this_] Qq. _the_ Ff.

[854] _lest my_] Ff Q₆. _let me_ Q₂ Q₃. _let my_ Q₄ Q₅.

[855] _extent_] _ostent_ Collier conj.

[856] _outwards_] Qq. _outward_ Ff.

[857] _handsaw_] Ff. _hand saw_ Q Q₃. _hand-saw_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆. _hernshaw_
Hanmer. _heronsew_ Anon. conj.

[858] SCENE VII. Pope.

[859] _too: at_] Ff. _too, at_ Q₆. _to, at_ Q₂ Q₃. _to, are_ Q₄ Q₅.

[860] _you see there is_] _as you see is_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

[861] _swaddling clouts_] _swadling clouts_ Qq. _swathing clouts_ Ff.
_swathling clouts_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[862] _Happily_] Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅ F₁ F₂ F₃. _Happely_ Q₆. _Haply_ F₄.

_he's_] F₁ F₃ F₄. _he is_ Qq. _hes_ F₂.

[863] _prophesy he_] _prophecy, he_ Q₂ Q₃. _prophecy that he_ Q₄.
_prophecie that he_ Q₅ Q₆. _prophesie. Hee_ F₁. _prophesie, He_ F₂ F₃
F₄.

[864] _it. You_] _it: You_ Q₆. _it, You_ Q₂ Q₃. _it, you_ Q₄ Q₅ Ff.

_o'_] Capell. _a_ Qq. _for a_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _for on_ F₄.

_morning;_] _morning,_ Q₂ Q₃. _morning_ Q₄ Q₅ Ff Q₆.

[865] _so_] (Q₁) Ff. _then_ Qq.

[866] _Roscius_] F₂ F₃ F₄. _Rossius_ Qq F₁.

[867] _was_] Qq. om. Ff.

_Rome,--_] _Rome--_ Ff. _Rome._ Qq.

[868] _my_] Qq. _mine_ Ff.

_honour,--_] _honour--_ Rowe. _honor._ or _honour._ Qq Ff.

[869] _Then ... ass,--_] Marked as a quotation by Steevens (Johnson
conj.)

_came_] Qq. _can_ Ff.

_ass,--_] _asse--_ Ff. _asse._ Qq.

[870] _pastoral-comical, historical-pastoral_] Q₄ Q₅
Q₆. _pastorall comicall, historicall pastorall_ Q₂ Q₃.
_pastoricall-comicall-historicall-pastorall_ Ff.

[871] _tragical-historical, tragical-comical-historical-pastoral_]
Omitted in Qq.

[872] _scene_] _seeme_ Q₄ Q₅.

_individable_] _indevidible_ Q₂ Q₃. _indevidable_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆. _indivible_
Ff. _undividable_ Rowe.

[873] _light. For ... liberty, these_] Theobald. _light for ...
liberty: these_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _light, for ... liberty. These_ Ff. _light
for ... liberty; these_ Q₆ Q (1676).

[874] _writ_] _wit_ Q (1676) and Rowe.

[875] _the liberty_] _liberty_ Q (1676).

[876] _O Jephthah ... Israel_] As a quotation in Pope.

[877] _&c. Jephthah_] Hanmer. _Ieptha_ Qq. _Iephta_ F₁ F₂. _Jephta_ F₃
F₄.

[878] _What a treasure_] (Q₁) Qq. Ff. _What treasure_ Dyce, ed. 2 (S.
Walker conj.)

[879] _Why ... well'_] As in Capell. Prose in Qq. Two lines in Ff.
Marked as a quotation in Pope.

[880] [Aside] Marked first by Capell.

[881] Pol. _If ... not._] Omitted in Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

[882] _you_] _thou_ Jennens.

[883] _Why ... wot,_] As in Malone. Prose in Qq Ff. Pope prints as a
quotation _by ... wot._

[884] _and then ... was,'_] As in Pope. Prose in Qq Ff.

[885] _pious chanson_] Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _Pons Chanson_ F₁. _Pans Chanson_
F₂ F₃ F₄. _pans chanson_ Q₆. _godly Ballet_ (Q₁). _rubrick_ Q (1676).
_Pont-chansons_ Hanmer. _Pont chanson_ (i.e. 'chanson du Pont Neuf')
Hunter conj.

[886] _abridgement comes_] (Q₁) Q₅ Q₆. _abridgment comes_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄.
_abridgements come_ Ff.

Enter....] Ff. Enter the Players. Qq. Enter certain players, usher'd.
Capell.

[887] _You are_] Qq. _Y'are_ Ff.

[888] _thee_] _you_ Hanmer.

_my_] Ff. om. Qq.

[889] _Why, thy_] Qq. _Thy_ Ff.

[890] _valanced_] _vallanced_ (Q₁). _valanct_ Q₂ Q₃. _valanc'd_ Q₄ Q₅
Q₆. _valiant_ Ff.

[891] _By'r lady_] _Byrlady_ F₁. _Berlady_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _burlady_ (Q₁).
_by lady_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _my Ladie_ Q₅. _my Lady_ Q₆.

_ladyship_] _lordship_ F₃ F₄.

_to heaven_] Qq. _heaven_ Ff.

[892] _chopine_] (Q₁) Qq. _choppine_ Ff. _chioppine_ Pope. _chapin_
Jennens.

[893] _e'en to 't_] Q₆. _ento't_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _e'ne to 't_ Ff.

_French_] (Q₁) Ff. _friendly_ Qq.

_falconers_] (Q₁). _fankners_ Q₂ Q₃. _faukners_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆. _faulconers_
Ff.

[894] First Play.] I Play. Ff. Player. Qq.

[895] _good_] (Q₁) Qq. om. Ff.

[896] _caviare_] Johnson. _cauiary_. Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _cauiarie_ F₁.
_cautary_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _caviary_ Q₆. _a caviary_ Q (1676). _caviar_ Rowe.
_contrary_ Long MS.

[897] _received_] _conceived_ Collier MS. See note (II).

_judgements_] Qq. _judgement_ Ff.

[898] _were no sallets_] Qq. _was no sallets_ (Q₁) Ff. _was no salts_
Pope (ed. I). _was no salt_ Pope (ed. 2). _were no salts_ Capell. _were
no saletés_ Becket conj.

[899] _indict_] Collier. _indite_ Qq Ff.

_affection_] Qq. _affectation_ Ff.

_but_] _but I_ Johnson conj.

[900] _as wholesome ... fine_] Qq. Omitted in Ff.

[901] _speech_] Qq. _cheefe speech_ F₁. _chiefe speech_ F₂. _chief
speech_ F₃ F₄.

_in it_] (Q₁) Ff. _in't_ Qq.

[902] _Æneas'_] Pope. _Aeneas_ Q₂ Q₃. _Æneas_ Q₄ Q₅ Ff Q₆.

_tale_] (Q₁) Ff. _talke_ Qq. _talkt_ Q (1676).

[903] _where_] (Q₁) Ff. _when_ Qq.

[904] _th' Hyrcanian_] Ff. _Th' ircanian_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _th' ircanian_
Q₆.

[905] _It is not so:_] Ff. _tis not so,_ Q₂ Q₃. _tis not_ Q₄ Q₅. _'tis
not_ Q₆. _'tis not,_ Q (1695).

[906] _his_] _he_ F₂ F₃.

[907] _he_] _his_ F₂ F₄.

_the ominous_] (Q₁) Ff. _th' omynous_ Q₂ Q₃. _th' ominous_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

[908] _this_] _his_ (Q₁) Q₆.

[909] _heraldry_] _heraldy_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.

_dismal: head to foot_] Pointed as in Ff. _dismall head to foote,_ Q₂
Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _dismall head to foot:_ Q₆.

[910] _total gules_] _totall Gules_ Qq. _to take Geulles_ F₁ F₂. _to
take Geules_ F₃ F₄.

[911] _impasted_] _imbasted_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

_streets_] _fires_ Pope.

[912] _and a_] Qq. _and_ Ff.

[913] _tyrannous ... murder_] _treacherous and damned light To the vile
murtherer_ Anon. conj. (Misc. Obs. on Hamlet, 1752).

[914] _their lord's murder_] _their Lords murther_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.
_their Lords murder_ Q₆. _their vilde Murthers_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _their vile
Murthers_ F₄. _the vile Murthers_ Rowe. _murthers vile_ Pope. _their
lords' murder_ S. Walker conj.

[915] _o'er-sized_] _ore-cised_ Qq.

[916] _carbuncles_] _carbuncle_ Q₆.

[917] _So, proceed you._] Qq. Omitted in Ff.

[918] _antique_] Pope. _anticke_ or _antick_ Qq Ff.

[919] _to his_] _in his_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[920] _match'd_] _matcht_ Qq. _match_ Ff.

[921] _falls ... Ilium_] _falls then senseless. Ilium_ Theobald conj.
(withdrawn).

_Then senseless Ilium_] Ff. Omitted in Qq.

[922] _this_] Qq. _his_ Ff.

[923] _base_] Qq. _Bace_ Ff.

[924] _Pyrrhus'_] Apostrophe inserted by Pope.

[925] _reverend_] Ff. _reverent_ Qq.

[926] _painted_] Omitted in F₃ F₄.

[927] _And like_] F₁ F₄. _Like_ Qq. _And lik'd_ F₂ F₃.

_and matter_] Erased in Long MS.

[928] _And ... nothing._] As in Qq. One line in Ff.

[929] _rack_] _rackes_ Q₆. _wrack_ Theobald conj. (withdrawn).

[930] _winds_] _wind_ Q₆.

[931] _region, so_] Qq. _region. So_ Ff.

[932] _Aroused_] Collier. _A rowsed_ Qq F₂ F₃ F₄. _A ro wsed_ F₁. _A
roused_ Theobald (ed. 2).

_a-work_] _a-worke_ F₁. _aworke_ Q₆. _a worke_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅ F₂. _a work_
F₃ F₄. _a' work_ Capell.

[933] _Cyclops'_] Apostrophe inserted by Theobald.

[934] _Mars's armour_] Capell. _Marses Armor_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _Mars his
Armours_ Ff. _Mars his armour_ Q₆.

[935] _strumpet, Fortune_] Hyphened in Ff.

[936] _fellies_] F₄. _follies_ Q₂ Q₃. _folles_ Q₄. _fellowes_ Q₅.
_fallies_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _felloes_ Q₆.

[937] _too_] _two_ F₃.

[938] _to the_] (Q₁) Qq. _to'th_ F₁ F₂. _to th'_ F₃ F₄.

[939] _who, O, who_] _who, O who_ (Q₁). _who, O who,_ Ff. _who, a woe,_
Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _who, ah woe_ Q₆. _who alas_ Q (1676). _who, a woe!_
Capell. _who, ah woe!_ Malone (Mason conj.)

[940] _mobled_] Qq. _Moblea_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _inobled_ F₁. _mob-led_ Upton
conj. _ennobl'd_ Capell. _mabled_ Malone. _mobiled_ Becket conj.

[941] _queen--_] _queen,--_ Theobald. _queene,_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _queene._ Q₅
F₂ Q₆. _queen._ F₁ F₃. _queen?_ F₄.

[942] _queen?_] Pointed as in Ff. _queene._ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _queene!_ Q₆.

[943] _mobled ... good._] F₂ F₃ F₄. _Inobled ... good._ F₁. Omitted in
Qq.

[944] _Run ... flames_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_flames_] Qq. _flame_ Ff.

[945] _bisson rheum_] F₄. _Bison rehume_ (_Bison_ in italics) Q₂ Q₃.
_bison rhume_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆. _bisson rheume_ F₁ F₂ F₃.

[946] _alarm_] _alarme_ Qq. _alarum_ Ff.

[947] _state_] Qq. _state,_ Ff.

_pronounced:_] _pronounst;_ Q₂ Q₃. _pronounc'd;_ Q₄ Q₅. _pronounc'd:_
Q₆. _pronounc'd?_ Ff.

[948] _husband's_] _husband_ Q₂ Q₃.

[949] _move_] _meant_ F₃ F₄.

_at_] om. F₃ F₄.

[950] _milch_] _melt_ Pope.

[951] _passion in_] _passioned_ Hanmer. _passionate_ Elze (Collier MS.)
_passion e'en_ Taylor conj. MS.

[952] _whether_] Malone. _where_ Qq Ff. _if_ (Q₁) Pope. _whe're_
Theobald. _whe'r_ Capell. _there, if_ Long MS. _whêr_ Dyce.

[953] _has tears_] _has not tears_ Hanmer.

_Prithee_] _Prethee_ Qq. _Pray you_ Ff.

[954] _of this_] Qq. Omitted in Ff.

[955] _will_] _doe_ Q₆.

_abstract_] Qq. _abstracts_ Ff.

[956] _you hear_] _ye heare_ or _ye hear_ Ff.

[957] _live_] Qq. _lived_ Ff.

[958] _desert_] _desart_ F₁ F₂.

[959] _God's_] _Odd's_ Johnson.

_bodykins_] Ff. _bodkin_ Qq. _bodikin_ Capell.

_much_] Qq. om. Ff. _farre_ (Q₁).

[960] _shall_] Qq. _should_ (Q₁) Ff.

[961] _hear_] _here_ Q₄ Q₅.

[Exit ...] Dyce. Exit Polon. Ff, after line 509. Exeunt Pol. and
Players. Qq (after _Elsinore_, line 520). Exeunt Polonius, and Players.
Capell (after _not_, line 519). Exit Pol. with some of the Players.
Reed (after line 509).

[962] [Aside to Player. Staunton.

[963] _Gonzago_] _Gonzaga_ Johnson.

[964] _ha't_] Ff. _hate_ Q₂ Q₃. _hav't_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆. _have it_ Q (1676).

[965] _for a need_] (Q₁) Ff. _for need_ Qq.

[966] _dozen_] (Q₁) F₃ F₄. _dosen_ F₁ F₂. _dosen lines_ Qq.

_or sixteen_] om. Q (1676).

[967] _you_] Qq. _ye_ Ff.

[968] [Exit First Player.] Exit Player. Reed. om Qq Ff.

[To Ros. and Guild. Johnson.

[969] [Exeunt Players. Collier MS. See note (II).

[970] _Good my_] _Good, my_ Capell.

[971] SCENE VIII. Pope.

_God be wi' ye_] _God b' w' ye_ F₄. _God buy 'ye_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _God buy to
you_ Qq. _Good b' w' ye_ Rowe. _God be wi' you_ Capell.

[Exeunt....] Edd. (Globe ed.) Exeunt. Q₂ Q₃ Ff (after line 522). Exit.
Q₄ Q₅ Q₆ (after line 522).

_I am_] _am I_ Q₆.

[972] _fiction_] F₂ Q₆ F₃ F₄. _fixion_ The rest.

[973] _own_] Qq. _whole_ Ff.

[974] _his visage_] Ff. _the visage_ Qq.

_wann'd_] _wand_ Qq. _warm'd_ Ff.

[975] _in's_] F₁ Q₆ F₃ F₄. _ins_ F₂. _in his_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.

[976] _and_] _an_ Q₂ Q₃.

[977] _conceit?_] Ff. _conceit;_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _conceit,_ Q₆.

_nothing!_] _nothing?_ Ff. _nothing,_ Qq.

[978] _For Hecuba!_] om. Seymour conj.

_Hecuba!_] _Hecuba?_ Ff Q₆. _Hecuba._ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.

[979] _to Hecuba_] (Q₁) Ff. _to her_ Qq.

[980] _the cue for_] Ff. _that for_ Qq. _that cue for_ Anon. conj.

[981] _appal_] _appall_ Rowe. _appale_ Q₂ Q₃. _appeale_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.
_apale_ Ff.

[982] _The ... Yet I,_] Arranged as in Johnson. One line in Qq Ff.

[983] _faculties_] Qq. _faculty_ Ff.

_eyes and ears_] _ears and eyes_ Johnson.

[984] _Yet I, A dull and_] _Yet I, a_ Seymour conj.

[985] _Yet I, A dull ... can say_] _Yet I say_ Pope, giving the omitted
words in the margin.

[986] _muddy-mettled_] Hyphened in Ff.

[987] _John-a-dreams_] _John a-deames_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _John-a-droynes_
Becket, after Steevens, conj.

[988] _coward?... this?_] Pointed as in Ff, and Q₆ substantially. Stops
in Qq. Commas in Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.

[989] _Ha!_] As a separate line by Steevens (1793). It begins line 552
in Qq Ff (_Hah,_ Q₂ Q₃. _Hah!_ Q₄ Q₅. _Hah?_ Q₆. _Ha?_ Ff), and ends
line 550 in Collier. Omitted by Pope.

[990] _'Swounds ... it:_] Qq (_it,_ Q₆). _Why I ... it:_ F₁ F₂. _Why
should I take it?_ F₃ F₄. _Yet I should take it--_ Pope.

[991] _oppression_] _transgression_ Collier MS. _aggression_ Singer
conj. (withdrawn).

[992] _have_] _a_ (Q₁) Q₂ Q₃.

[993] _offal: bloody,_] _offall: bloudy,_ Q₆. _offall, bloody,_ Q₂ Q₃
Q₄ Q₅. _offall, bloudy: a_ Ff (_bloody:_ F₃ F₄).

[994] _Remorseless ... villain!_] Omitted by Jennens.

[995] _O, vengeance!_] Omitted in Qq.

[996] _Why,_] _Why_ Qq. _Who?_ Ff. om. Knight.

_This_] Qq. _I sure, this_ Ff.

[997] _a dear father murder'd_] _a dear father murther'd_ Capell. _a
deere murthered_ Q₂ Q₃. _a deere father murthered_ Q₄ Q₅. _a deare
father murthered_ Q₆. _the deere murthered_ Ff (_dear_ F₃ F₄).

[998] _And fall ... play_] Arranged as in Capell. Three lines, ending
_foh ... heard ... play,_ in Qq. Three lines, ending _drab, ...
braine ... play,_ in Ff. Four lines, ending _drab, ... foh!...
heard, ... play,_ in Johnson.

[999] _drab, A scullion_] Ff. _drabbe; a stallyon_ Q₂ Q₃. _drabbe; a
stallion_ Q₄. _drabbe; stallion_ Q₅. _drabbe, stallion_ Q₆. _drab--A
stallion_ Pope. _drab--A cullion_ Theobald.

[1000] _About, my brain!_] _About my braine,_ (Q₁). _About my braine._
Ff (_brain._ F₃ F₄). _About my braines;_ Q₂ Q₃. _About my braines,_ Q₄
Q₅ Q₆. _about my brain--_ Pope (ed. 1). _about my brain!--_ Pope (ed.
2). _about, my brain!--_ Theobald. _about 't my brains!_ Hunter conj.
See note (XV).

_Hum_] Qq. om. Ff.

_I have_] _I've_ Pope.

[1001] _sitting_] om. Pope.

[1002] _struck so to_] F₃ F₄. _strooke so to_ Qq F₁ F₂. _struck unto_
Rowe (ed. 2).

[1003] _I'll have these players_] _I'll observe his looks,_ Pope (ed.
1), corrected in ed. 2.

[1004] _tent_] Qq F₁. _rent_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

_he but_] Ff. _a doe_ Qq. _he do_ Q (1676) and Capell.

_blench_] _blink_ Taylor conj. MS. _bleach_ Anon. conj.

[1005] _The_] _This_ Johnson.

[1006] _be the devil_] F₃ F₄. _be the divell_ (Q₁) F₁ F₂. _be a deale_
Q₂ Q₃. _be a divell_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

_and the devil_] _and the deale_ Q₂ Q₃.




ACT III.


SCENE I. _A room in the castle._

       _Enter_ KING, QUEEN, POLONIUS, OPHELIA, ROSENCRANTZ, _and_
                          GUILDENSTERN.[1007]

    _King._ And can you, by no drift of circumstance,[1008]
    Get from him why he puts on this confusion,[1009]
    Grating so harshly all his days of quiet
    With turbulent and dangerous lunacy?

    _Ros._ He does confess he feels himself distracted,                5
    But from what cause he will by no means speak.[1010]

    _Guil._ Nor do we find him forward to be sounded;[1011]
    But, with a crafty madness, keeps aloof,[1011]
    When we would bring him on to some confession[1011]
    Of his true state.[1011]

    _Queen._           Did he receive you well?[1011][1012]           10

    _Ros._ Most like a gentleman.

    _Guil._ But with much forcing of his disposition.

    _Ros._ Niggard of question, but of our demands[1013]
    Most free in his reply.[1013]

    _Queen._                Did you assay him[1014][1015]
    To any pastime?[1014][1016]                                       15

    _Ros._ Madam, it so fell out that certain players[1017]
    We o'er-raught on the way: of these we told him,[1018]
    And there did seem in him a kind of joy
    To hear of it: they are about the court,[1019]
    And, as I think, they have already order                          20
    This night to play before him.

    _Pol._                         'Tis most true:
    And he beseech'd me to entreat your majesties
    To hear and see the matter.

    _King._ With all my heart; and it doth much content me[1020]
    To hear him so inclined.[1020]                                    25
    Good gentlemen, give him a further edge,[1020]
    And drive his purpose on to these delights.[1020][1021]

    _Ros._ We shall, my lord.

                                 [_Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern._

    _King._                   Sweet Gertrude, leave us too;[1022]
    For we have closely sent for Hamlet hither,[1023]
    That he, as 'twere by accident, may here[1024][1025]              30
    Affront Ophelia:[1024][1026]
    Her father and myself, lawful espials,[1026][1027]
    Will so bestow ourselves that, seeing unseen,[1028]
    We may of their encounter frankly judge,[1029]
    And gather by him, as he is behaved,                              35
    If't be the affliction of his love or no[1030]
    That thus he suffers for.

    _Queen._                  I shall obey you:
    And for your part, Ophelia, I do wish[1031]
    That your good beauties be the happy cause[1032]
    Of Hamlet's wildness: so shall I hope your virtues[1032][1033]    40
    Will bring him to his wonted way again,[1034]
    To both your honours.

    _Oph._                Madam, I wish it may.           [_Exit Queen._

    _Pol._ Ophelia, walk you here. Gracious, so please you,[1035]
    We will bestow ourselves. [_To Ophelia_] Read on this book;[1036]
    That show of such an exercise may colour                          45
    Your loneliness. We are oft to blame in this,--[1037]
    'Tis too much proved--that with devotion's visage
    And pious action we do sugar o'er[1038]
    The devil himself.

    _King._ [_Aside_] O, 'tis too true![1039]
    How smart a lash that speech doth give my conscience!             50
    The harlot's cheek, beautied with plastering art,
    Is not more ugly to the thing that helps it
    Than is my deed to my most painted word:
    O heavy burthen!

    _Pol._ I hear him coming: let's withdraw, my lord.[1040]          55

                                            [_Exeunt King and Polonius._

                         _Enter_ HAMLET.[1041]

    _Ham._ To be, or not to be: that is the question:
    Whether 'tis nobler in the mind to suffer
    The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune,[1042]
    Or to take arms against a sea of troubles,[1043]
    And by opposing end them? To die: to sleep;[1044][1045]           60
    No more; and by a sleep to say we end[1045][1046]
    The heart-ache, and the thousand natural shocks
    That flesh is heir to, 'tis a consummation[1047]
    Devoutly to be wish'd. To die, to sleep;[1048]
    To sleep: perchance to dream: ay, there's the rub;                65
    For in that sleep of death what dreams may come,
    When we have shuffled off this mortal coil,[1049]
    Must give us pause: there's the respect[1050]
    That makes calamity of so long life;[1050]
    For who would bear the whips and scorns of time,[1051]            70
    The oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely,[1052]
    The pangs of despised love, the law's delay,[1053]
    The insolence of office, and the spurns
    That patient merit of the unworthy takes,
    When he himself might his quietus make[1054]                      75
    With a bare bodkin? who would fardels bear,[1055]
    To grunt and sweat under a weary life,[1056]
    But that the dread of something after death,
    The undiscover'd country from whose bourn[1057]
    No traveller returns, puzzles the will,[1058]                     80
    And makes us rather bear those ills we have
    Than fly to others that we know not of?
    Thus conscience does make cowards of us all,[1059]
    And thus the native hue of resolution[1060]
    Is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought,[1061]             85
    And enterprises of great pitch and moment[1062]
    With this regard their currents turn awry[1063]
    And lose the name of action. Soft you now![1064]
    The fair Ophelia! Nymph, in thy orisons[1065]
    Be all my sins remember'd.

    _Oph._                     Good my lord,[1066]                    90
    How does your honour for this many a day?

    _Ham._ I humbly thank you: well, well, well.[1067]

    _Oph._ My lord, I have remembrances of yours,
    That I have longed long to re-deliver;[1068]
    I pray you, now receive them.

    _Ham._                        No, not I;[1069][1070]              95
    I never gave you aught.[1070]

    _Oph._ My honour'd lord, you know right well you did;[1071]
    And with them words of so sweet breath composed
    As made the things more rich: their perfume lost,[1072]
    Take these again; for to the noble mind                          100
    Rich gifts wax poor when givers prove unkind.
    There, my lord.

    _Ham._ Ha, ha! are you honest?

    _Oph._ My lord?[1073]

    _Ham._ Are you fair?                                             105

    _Oph._ What means your lordship?

    _Ham._ That if you be honest and fair, your honesty[1074][1075]
    should admit no discourse to your beauty.[1075]

    _Oph._ Could beauty, my lord, have better commerce[1076]
    than with honesty?[1077]                                         110

    _Ham._ Ay, truly; for the power of beauty will sooner
    transform honesty from what it is to a bawd than the force
    of honesty can translate beauty into his likeness: this was[1078]
    sometime a paradox, but now the time gives it proof. I[1079]
    did love you once.                                               115

    _Oph._ Indeed, my lord, you made me believe so.

    _Ham._ You should not have believed me; for virtue
    cannot so inoculate our old stock but we shall relish of it:[1080]
    I loved you not.[1081]

    _Oph._ I was the more deceived.                                  120

    _Ham._ Get thee to a nunnery: why wouldst thou be a[1082]
    breeder of sinners? I am myself indifferent honest; but yet
    I could accuse me of such things that it were better my
    mother had not borne me: I am very proud, revengeful,
    ambitious; with more offences at my beck than I have[1083]       125
    thoughts to put them in, imagination to give them shape,[1084]
    or time to act them in. What should such fellows as I do
    crawling between heaven and earth? We are arrant knaves[1085]
    all; believe none of us. Go thy ways to a nunnery.[1086]
    Where's your father?                                             130

    _Oph._ At home, my lord.

    _Ham._ Let the doors be shut upon him, that he may[1087]
    play the fool no where but in's own house. Farewell.[1087][1088]

    _Oph._ O, help him, you sweet heavens!

    _Ham._ If thou dost marry, I'll give thee this plague for[1089]  135
    thy dowry: be thou as chaste as ice, as pure as snow, thou
    shalt not escape calumny. Get thee to a nunnery, go: farewell.[1090]
    Or, if thou wilt needs marry, marry a fool; for wise
    men know well enough what monsters you make of them.
    To a nunnery, go; and quickly too. Farewell.[1091]               140

    _Oph._ O heavenly powers, restore him![1092]

    _Ham._ I have heard of your paintings too, well enough;[1093]
    God hath given you one face, and you make yourselves[1094]
    another: you jig, you amble, and you lisp, and nick-name[1095]
    God's creatures, and make your wantonness your ignorance.[1096][1097]  145
    Go to, I'll no more on't; it hath made me mad.[1097][1098]
    I say, we will have no more marriages: those that are married[1099]
    already, all but one, shall live; the rest shall keep as[1100]
    they are. To a nunnery, go.                           [_Exit._[1101]

    _Oph._ O, what a noble mind is here o'erthrown![1102]            150
    The courtier's, soldier's, scholar's, eye, tongue, sword:[1103]
    The expectancy and rose of the fair state,[1104]
    The glass of fashion and the mould of form,
    The observed of all observers, quite, quite down!
    And I, of ladies most deject and wretched,[1105]                 155
    That suck'd the honey of his music vows,[1106]
    Now see that noble and most sovereign reason,[1107]
    Like sweet bells jangled, out of tune and harsh;[1108]
    That unmatch'd form and feature of blown youth[1109]
    Blasted with ecstasy: O, woe is me,                              160
    To have seen what I have seen, see what I see![1110]

                    _Re-enter_ KING _and_ POLONIUS.

    _King._ Love! his affections do not that way tend;[1111]
    Nor what he spake, though it lack'd form a little,[1112]
    Was not like madness. There's something in his soul[1113]
    O'er which his melancholy sits on brood,                         165
    And I do doubt the hatch and the disclose
    Will be some danger: which for to prevent,[1114]
    I have in quick determination
    Thus set it down:--he shall with speed to England,[1115]
    For the demand of our neglected tribute:                         170
    Haply the seas and countries different
    With variable objects shall expel
    This something-settled matter in his heart,[1116]
    Whereon his brains still beating puts him thus[1117][1118]
    From fashion of himself. What think you on 't?[1117]             175

    _Pol._ It shall do well: but yet do I believe[1119][1120]
    The origin and commencement of his grief[1119][1121]
    Sprung from neglected love. How now, Ophelia![1122]
    You need not tell us what Lord Hamlet said;
    We heard it all. My lord, do as you please;[1123]                180
    But, if you hold it fit, after the play,
    Let his queen mother all alone entreat him
    To show his grief: let her be round with him;[1124]
    And I'll be placed, so please you, in the ear[1125]
    Of all their conference. If she find him not,                    185
    To England send him, or confine him where
    Your wisdom best shall think.

    _King._                       It shall be so:
    Madness in great ones must not unwatch'd go.        [_Exeunt._[1126]


SCENE II. _A hall in the castle._

                  _Enter_ HAMLET _and_ Players.[1127]

    _Ham._ Speak the speech, I pray you, as I pronounced[1128]
    it to you, trippingly on the tongue: but if you mouth it, as[1129]
    many of your players do, I had as lief the town-crier spoke[1130]
    my lines. Nor do not saw the air too much with your[1131]
    hand, thus; but use all gently: for in the very torrent, tempest,  5
    and, as I may say, whirlwind of your passion, you[1132]
    must acquire and beget a temperance that may give it
    smoothness. O, it offends me to the soul to hear a robustious[1133]
    periwig-pated fellow tear a passion to tatters, to very[1134]
    rags, to split the ears of the groundlings, who, for the most[1135]  10
    part, are capable of nothing but inexplicable dumb-shows
    and noise: I would have such a fellow whipped for o'er-doing[1136]
    Termagant; it out-herods Herod: pray you, avoid it.

    _First Play._ I warrant your honour.[1137]

    _Ham._ Be not too tame neither, but let your own discretion       15
    be your tutor: suit the action to the word, the word[1138]
    to the action; with this special observance, that you o'er-step[1139]
    not the modesty of nature: for any thing so overdone[1140]
    is from the purpose of playing, whose end, both at the first[1141]
    and now, was and is, to hold, as 'twere, the mirror up to         20
    nature; to show virtue her own feature, scorn her own[1142]
    image, and the very age and body of the time his form and[1143]
    pressure. Now this overdone or come tardy off, though[1144][1145]
    it make the unskilful laugh, cannot but make the judicious[1145]
    grieve; the censure of the which one must in your allowance[1146]  25
    o'erweigh a whole theatre of others. O, there be[1147]
    players that I have seen play, and heard others praise, and[1148]
    that highly, not to speak it profanely, that neither having[1149]
    the accent of Christians nor the gait of Christian, pagan,[1150]
    nor man, have so strutted and bellowed, that I have thought[1150][1151]  30
    some of nature's journeymen had made men, and not made[1152]
    them well, they imitated humanity so abominably.

    _First Play._ I hope we have reformed that indifferently[1137]
    with us, sir.[1153]

    _Ham._ O, reform it altogether. And let those that play           35
    your clowns speak no more than is set down for them: for
    there be of them that will themselves laugh, to set on some[1154]
    quantity of barren spectators to laugh too, though in the[1155]
    mean time some necessary question of the play be then to
    be considered: that's villanous, and shows a most pitiful ambition  40
    in the fool that uses it. Go, make you ready.

                                                      [_Exeunt Players._

        _Enter_ POLONIUS, ROSENCRANTZ, _and_ GUILDENSTERN.[1156]

    How now, my lord! will the king hear this piece of work?[1157]

    _Pol._ And the queen too, and that presently.[1158]

    _Ham._ Bid the players make haste.           [_Exit Polonius._[1159]
    Will you two help to hasten them?                                 45

    _Ros. Guil._ We will, my lord.

                           [_Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern._[1160]

    _Ham._ What ho! Horatio!

                         _Enter_ HORATIO.[1161]

    _Hor._ Here, sweet lord, at your service.[1162]

    _Ham._ Horatio, thou art e'en as just a man
    As e'er my conversation coped withal.[1163]                       50

    _Hor._ O, my dear lord,--[1164]

    _Ham._                    Nay, do not think I flatter;
    For what advancement may I hope from thee,
    That no revenue hast but thy good spirits,[1165]
    To feed and clothe thee? Why should the poor be flatter'd?[1166]
    No, let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp,[1167]                55
    And crook the pregnant hinges of the knee[1168]
    Where thrift may follow fawning. Dost thou hear?[1169]
    Since my dear soul was mistress of her choice,[1170]
    And could of men distinguish, her election[1171]
    Hath seal'd thee for herself: for thou hast been[1171]            60
    As one, in suffering all, that suffers nothing;
    A man that fortune's buffets and rewards[1172]
    Hast ta'en with equal thanks: and blest are those[1173]
    Whose blood and judgement are so well commingled[1174]
    That they are not a pipe for fortune's finger                     65
    To sound what stop she please. Give me that man[1175]
    That is not passion's slave, and I will wear him
    In my heart's core, ay, in my heart of heart,[1176]
    As I do thee. Something too much of this.
    There is a play to-night before the king;                         70
    One scene of it comes near the circumstance
    Which I have told thee of my father's death:[1177]
    I prithee, when thou seest that act a-foot,[1178]
    Even with the very comment of thy soul[1179]
    Observe my uncle: if his occulted guilt[1180]                     75
    Do not itself unkennel in one speech,[1181]
    It is a damned ghost that we have seen,
    And my imaginations are as foul
    As Vulcan's stithy. Give him heedful note;[1182]
    For I mine eyes will rivet to his face,[1183]                     80
    And after we will both our judgements join[1184]
    In censure of his seeming.[1185]

    _Hor._                     Well, my lord:
    If he steal aught the whilst this play is playing,[1186]
    And 'scape detecting, I will pay the theft.[1187]

    _Ham._ They are coming to the play: I must be idle:[1188]         85
    Get you a place.

    _Danish march. A flourish. Enter_ KING, QUEEN, POLONIUS,
        OPHELIA, ROSENCRANTZ, GUILDENSTERN, _and other Lords
        attendant, with the Guard carrying torches_.[1189]

    _King._ How fares our cousin Hamlet?[1190]

    _Ham._ Excellent, i' faith; of the chameleon's dish: I eat[1191][1192]
    the air, promise-crammed: you cannot feed capons so.[1191]

    _King._ I have nothing with this answer, Hamlet; these[1191]      90
    words are not mine.[1191]

    _Ham._ No, nor mine now. [_To Polonius_] My lord, you[1191][1193]
    played once i' the university, you say?[1191][1194]

    _Pol._ That did I, my lord, and was accounted a good[1195]
    actor.                                                            95

    _Ham._ What did you enact?[1196]

    _Pol._ I did enact Julius Cæsar: I was killed i' the Capitol;[1197]
    Brutus killed me.

    _Ham._ It was a brute part of him to kill so capital a
    calf there. Be the players ready?                                100

    _Ros._ Ay, my lord; they stay upon your patience.[1198]

    _Queen._ Come hither, my dear Hamlet, sit by me.[1199]

    _Ham._ No, good mother, here's metal more attractive.[1200]

    _Pol._ [_To the King_] O, ho! do you mark that?[1201]

    _Ham._ Lady, shall I lie in your lap?[1202]                      105

                                        [_Lying down at Ophelia's feet._

    _Oph._ No, my lord.

    _Ham._ I mean, my head upon your lap?[1203][1204]

    _Oph._ Ay, my lord.[1203]

    _Ham._ Do you think I meant country matters?[1205]

    _Oph._ I think nothing, my lord.                                 110

    _Ham._ That's a fair thought to lie between maids' legs.[1206]

    _Oph._ What is, my lord?

    _Ham._ Nothing.

    _Oph._ You are merry, my lord.[1207]

    _Ham._ Who, I?                                                   115

    _Oph._ Ay, my lord.

    _Ham._ O God, your only jig-maker. What should a[1208]
    man do but be merry? for, look you, how cheerfully my
    mother looks, and my father died within 's two hours.[1209]

    _Oph._ Nay, 'tis twice two months, my lord.[1210]                120

    _Ham._ So long? Nay, then, let the devil wear black, for[1211][1212]
    I'll have a suit of sables. O heavens! die two months ago,[1212][1213]
    and not forgotten yet? Then there's hope a great man's
    memory may outlive his life half a year: but, by'r lady, he[1214][1215]
    must build churches then; or else shall he suffer not thinking[1215]  125
    on, with the hobby-horse, whose epitaph is, 'For, O,
    for, O, the hobby-horse is forgot.'[1216]

                 _Hautboys play. The dumb-show enters._

    _Enter a_ King _and a_ Queen _very lovingly; the Queen
        embracing him, and he her. She kneels, and makes show of
        protestation unto him. He takes her up, and declines his
        head upon her neck: lays him down upon a bank of flowers:
        she, seeing him asleep, leaves him. Anon comes in a fellow,
        takes off his crown, kisses it, and pours poison in the_
        King's _ears, and exit. The_ Queen _returns; finds the_
        King _dead, and makes passionate action. The_ Poisoner,
        _with some two or three_ Mutes, _comes in again, seeming
        to lament with her. The dead body is carried away. The_
        Poisoner _wooes the_ Queen _with gifts: she seems loath and
        unwilling awhile, but in the end accepts his love_.[1217]

                                                              [_Exeunt._

    _Oph._ What means this, my lord?[1218]

    _Ham._ Marry, this is miching mallecho; it means mischief.       130

    _Oph._ Belike this show imports the argument of the play.

                        _Enter_ Prologue.[1219]

    _Ham._ We shall know by this fellow: the players cannot[1220]
    keep counsel; they'll tell all.[1221]

    _Oph._ Will he tell us what this show meant?[1222]

    _Ham._ Ay, or any show that you'll show him: be not you[1223]    135
    ashamed to show, he'll not shame to tell you what it means.

    _Oph._ You are naught, you are naught: I'll mark the[1224]
    play.

    _Pro._ For us, and for our tragedy,
    Here stooping to your clemency,                                  140
    We beg your hearing patiently.

    _Ham._ Is this a prologue, or the posy of a ring?[1225]

    _Oph._ 'Tis brief, my lord.

    _Ham._ As woman's love.

              _Enter two_ Players, King _and_ Queen.[1226]

    _P. King._ Full thirty times hath Phœbus' cart gone
            round[1227][1228][1229]                                  145
    Neptune's salt wash and Tellus' orbed ground,[1228][1230]
    And thirty dozen moons with borrowed sheen[1231]
    About the world have times twelve thirties been,[1232]
    Since love our hearts and Hymen did our hands
    Unite commutual in most sacred bands.[1233]                      150

    _P. Queen._ So many journeys may the sun and moon[1234]
    Make us again count o'er ere love be done!
    But, woe is me, you are so sick of late,
    So far from cheer and from your former state,[1235]
    That I distrust you. Yet, though I distrust,                     155
    Discomfort you, my lord, it nothing must:[1236]
    For women's fear and love holds quantity,[1236][1237]
    In neither aught, or in extremity.[1238]
    Now, what my love is, proof hath made you know,[1239]
    And as my love is sized, my fear is so:[1240]                    160
    Where love is great, the littlest doubts are fear,[1241][1242]
    Where little fears grow great, great love grows there.[1241]

    _P. King._ Faith, I must leave thee, love, and shortly too;
    My operant powers their functions leave to do:[1243]
    And thou shalt live in this fair world behind,[1244]             165
    Honour'd, beloved; and haply one as kind[1245]
    For husband shalt thou--[1246]

    _P. Queen._              O, confound the rest!
    Such love must needs be treason in my breast:
    In second husband let me be accurst!
    None wed the second but who kill'd the first.[1247]              170

    _Ham._ [_Aside_] Wormwood, wormwood.[1248]

    _P. Queen._ The instances that second marriage move[1249]
    Are base respects of thrift, but none of love:[1250]
    A second time I kill my husband dead,[1251]
    When second husband kisses me in bed.                            175

    _P. King._ I do believe you think what now you speak,[1252]
    But what we do determine oft we break.
    Purpose is but the slave to memory,
    Of violent birth but poor validity:[1253]
    Which now, like fruit unripe, sticks on the tree,[1254]          180
    But fall unshaken when they mellow be.
    Most necessary 'tis that we forget
    To pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt:
    What to ourselves in passion we propose,
    The passion ending, doth the purpose lose.                       185
    The violence of either grief or joy[1255]
    Their own enactures with themselves destroy:[1256]
    Where joy most revels, grief doth most lament;
    Grief joys, joy grieves, on slender accident.[1257]
    This world is not for aye, nor 'tis not strange[1258]            190
    That even our loves should with our fortunes change,
    For 'tis a question left us yet to prove,
    Whether love lead fortune or else fortune love.[1259]
    The great man down, you mark his favourite flies;[1260]
    The poor advanced makes friends of enemies:                      195
    And hitherto doth love on fortune tend;[1261]
    For who not needs shall never lack a friend,[1262]
    And who in want a hollow friend doth try
    Directly seasons him his enemy.[1263]
    But, orderly to end where I begun,                               200
    Our wills and fates do so contrary run,
    That our devices still are overthrown,
    Our thoughts are ours, their ends none of our own:
    So think thou wilt no second husband wed,[1264]
    But die thy thoughts when thy first lord is dead.[1265]          205

    _P. Queen._ Nor earth to me give food nor heaven light![1266]
    Sport and repose lock from me day and night!
    To desperation turn my trust and hope![1267]
    An anchor's cheer in prison be my scope![1267][1268]
    Each opposite, that blanks the face of joy,                      210
    Meet what I would have well and it destroy!
    Both here and hence pursue me lasting strife,
    If, once a widow, ever I be wife![1269]

    _Ham._ If she should break it now![1270]

    _P. King._ 'Tis deeply sworn. Sweet, leave me here awhile;[1271]  215
    My spirits grow dull, and fain I would beguile
    The tedious day with sleep.                         [_Sleeps._[1272]

    _P. Queen._                 Sleep rock thy brain;
    And never come mischance between us twain!            [_Exit._[1273]

    _Ham._ Madam, how like you this play?[1274]

    _Queen._ The lady doth protest too much, methinks.[1275]         220

    _Ham._ O, but she'll keep her word.

    _King._ Have you heard the argument? Is there no
    offence in't?

    _Ham._ No, no, they do but jest, poison in jest; no offence
    i' the world.[1276]                                              225

    _King._ What do you call the play?

    _Ham._ The Mouse-trap. Marry, how? Tropically.[1277]
    This play is the image of a murder done in Vienna: Gonzago[1278]
    is the duke's name; his wife, Baptista: you shall see[1279]
    anon; 'tis a knavish piece of work: but what o' that? your[1280]  230
    majesty, and we that have free souls, it touches us not: let[1281]
    the galled jade wince, our withers are unwrung.[1282]

                        _Enter_ LUCIANUS.[1283]

    This is one Lucianus, nephew to the king.[1284]

    _Oph._ You are as good as a chorus, my lord.[1285]

    _Ham._ I could interpret between you and your love, if           235
    I could see the puppets dallying.

    _Oph._ You are keen, my lord, you are keen.

    _Ham._ It would cost you a groaning to take off my edge.[1286]

    _Oph._ Still better, and worse.[1287]

    _Ham._ So you must take your husbands. Begin, murderer;[1288][1289]  240
    pox, leave thy damnable faces, and begin. Come:[1289][1290]
    the croaking raven doth bellow for revenge.[1291]

    _Luc._ Thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, and time agreeing;[1292]
    Confederate season, else no creature seeing;[1293]
    Thou mixture rank, of midnight weeds collected,                  245
    With Hecate's ban thrice blasted, thrice infected,[1294]
    Thy natural magic and dire property,[1295]
    On wholesome life usurp immediately.

                       [_Pours the poison into the sleeper's ear._[1296]

    _Ham._ He poisons him i' the garden for his estate. His[1297]
    name's Gonzago: the story is extant, and written in very[1298]   250
    choice Italian: you shall see anon how the murderer gets
    the love of Gonzago's wife.

    _Oph._ The king rises.

    _Ham._ What, frighted with false fire![1299]

    _Queen._ How fares my lord?                                      255

    _Pol._ Give o'er the play.

    _King._ Give me some light. Away!

    _Pol._ Lights, lights, lights!

                             [_Exeunt all but Hamlet and Horatio._[1300]

    _Ham._ Why, let the stricken deer go weep,[1301]
    The hart ungalled play;[1302]                                    260
    For some must watch, while some must sleep:[1303]
      Thus runs the world away.[1304]

    Would not this, sir, and a forest of feathers--if the rest of
    my fortunes turn Turk with me--with two Provincial roses[1305]
    on my razed shoes, get me a fellowship in a cry of players,[1306]  265
    sir?[1307]

    _Hor._ Half a share.

    _Ham._ A whole one, I.[1308]
    For thou dost know, O Damon dear,
      This realm dismantled was[1309]                                270
    Of Jove himself; and now reigns here[1309]
      A very, very--pajock.[1310]

    _Hor._ You might have rhymed.

    _Ham._ O good Horatio, I'll take the ghost's word for a
    thousand pound. Didst perceive?[1311]                            275

    _Hor._ Very well, my lord.

    _Ham._ Upon the talk of the poisoning?[1312]

    _Hor._ I did very well note him.[1313]

    _Ham._ Ah, ha! Come, some music! come, the recorders!            280
            For if the king like not the comedy,[1314]
            Why then, belike, he likes it not, perdy.
    Come, some music!

            _Re-enter_ ROSENCRANTZ _and_ GUILDENSTERN.[1315]

    _Guil._ Good my lord, vouchsafe me a word with you.[1316]

    _Ham._ Sir, a whole history.                                     285

    _Guil._ The king, sir,--[1317]

    _Ham._ Ay, sir, what of him?[1318]

    _Guil._ Is in his retirement marvellous distempered.

    _Ham._ With drink, sir?

    _Guil._ No, my lord, rather with choler.[1319]                   290

    _Ham._ Your wisdom should show itself more richer to[1320]
    signify this to the doctor; for, for me to put him to his purgation[1321]
    would perhaps plunge him into far more choler.[1322]

    _Guil._ Good my lord, put your discourse into some[1323]
    frame, and start not so wildly from my affair.[1323][1324]       295

    _Ham._ I am tame, sir: pronounce.

    _Guil._ The queen, your mother, in most great affliction
    of spirit, hath sent me to you.

    _Ham._ You are welcome.[1325]

    _Guil._ Nay, good my lord, this courtesy is not of the           300
    right breed. If it shall please you to make me a wholesome
    answer, I will do your mother's commandment: if not, your
    pardon and my return shall be the end of my business.[1326]

    _Ham._ Sir, I cannot.

    _Guil._ What, my lord?[1327]                                     305

    _Ham._ Make you a wholesome answer; my wit's diseased:[1328]
    but, sir, such answer as I can make, you shall command;[1329]
    or rather, as you say, my mother: therefore no[1330]
    more, but to the matter: my mother, you say,--[1331]

    _Ros._ Then thus she says; your behaviour hath struck[1332]      310
    her into amazement and admiration.

    _Ham._ O wonderful son, that can so astonish a mother![1333]
    But is there no sequel at the heels of this mother's admiration?[1334]
    Impart.[1335]

    _Ros._ She desires to speak with you in her closet, ere          315
    you go to bed.

    _Ham._ We shall obey, were she ten times our mother.
    Have you any further trade with us?

    _Ros._ My lord, you once did love me.

    _Ham._ So I do still, by these pickers and stealers.[1336]       320

    _Ros._ Good my lord, what is your cause of distemper?
    you do surely bar the door upon your own liberty, if you[1337]
    deny your griefs to your friend.

    _Ham._ Sir, I lack advancement.

    _Ros._ How can that be, when you have the voice of the           325
    king himself for your succession in Denmark?

    _Ham._ Ay, sir, but 'while the grass grows,'--the proverb[1338]
    is something musty.

               _Re-enter_ Players _with recorders_.[1339]

    O, the recorders! let me see one. To withdraw with you:--[1340]
    why do you go about to recover the wind of me, as if you         330
    would drive me into a toil?

    _Guil._  O, my lord, if my duty be too bold, my love is[1341]
    too unmannerly.[1341]

    _Ham._ I do not well understand that. Will you play
    upon this pipe?                                                  335

    _Guil._  My lord, I cannot.[1342]

    _Ham._  I pray you.

    _Guil._  Believe me, I cannot.

    _Ham._  I do beseech you.[1343]

    _Guil._  I know no touch of it, my lord.[1344]                   340

    _Ham._ It is as easy as lying: govern these ventages[1345]
    with your fingers and thumb, give it breath with your[1346]
    mouth, and it will discourse most eloquent music. Look[1347]
    you, these are the stops.

    _Guil._  But these cannot I command to any utterance             345
    of harmony; I have not the skill.

    _Ham._ Why, look you now, how unworthy a thing you
    make of me! You would play upon me; you would seem[1348]
    to know my stops; you would pluck out the heart of my
    mystery; you would sound me from my lowest note to the[1349]     350
    top of my compass: and there is much music, excellent[1349]
    voice, in this little organ; yet cannot you make it speak.[1350]
    'Sblood, do you think I am easier to be played on than a[1351]
    pipe? Call me what instrument you will, though you can[1352]
    fret me, yet you cannot play upon me.[1352][1353]                355

                        _Enter_ POLONIUS.[1354]

    God bless you, sir![1355]

    _Pol._ My lord, the queen would speak with you, and
    presently.

    _Ham._ Do you see yonder cloud that's almost in shape[1356][1357]
    of a camel?[1357][1358][1359]                                    360

    _Pol._ By the mass, and 'tis like a camel, indeed.[1360][1359]

    _Ham._ Methinks it is like a weasel.[1361]

    _Pol._ It is backed like a weasel.[1361][1362]

    _Ham._ Or like a whale?[1363]

    _Pol._ Very like a whale.                                        365

    _Ham._ Then I will come to my mother by and by.[1364]
    They fool me to the top of my bent. I will come by and[1365][1366]
    by.[1366]

    _Pol._ I will say so.                  [_Exit Polonius._[1366][1367]

    _Ham._ 'By and by' is easily said. Leave me, friends.[1366]      370

                                         [_Exeunt all but Hamlet._[1368]

    'Tis now the very witching time of night,
    When churchyards yawn, and hell itself breathes out[1369]
    Contagion to this world: now could I drink hot blood,[1370]
    And do such bitter business as the day[1371]
    Would quake to look on. Soft! now to my mother.[1372]            375
    O heart, lose not thy nature; let not ever[1373]
    The soul of Nero enter this firm bosom:
    Let me be cruel, not unnatural:[1374]
    I will speak daggers to her, but use none;[1375]
    My tongue and soul in this be hypocrites;                        380
    How in my words soever she be shent,[1376][1377]
    To give them seals never, my soul, consent!     [_Exit._[1376][1378]


SCENE III. _A room in the castle._

          _Enter_ KING, ROSENCRANTZ, _and_ GUILDENSTERN.[1379]

    _King._  I like him not, nor stands it safe with us
    To let his madness range. Therefore prepare you;[1380]
    I your commission will forthwith dispatch,
    And he to England shall along with you:
    The terms of our estate may not endure[1381]                       5
    Hazard so near us as doth hourly grow[1382]
    Out of his lunacies.

    _Guil._              We will ourselves provide:[1383]
    Most holy and religious fear it is
    To keep those many many bodies safe[1384][1385]
    That live and feed upon your majesty.[1384]                       10

    _Ros._ The single and peculiar life is bound[1386]
    With all the strength and armour of the mind
    To keep itself from noyance; but much more[1387]
    That spirit upon whose weal depends and rests[1388]
    The lives of many. The cease of majesty[1389]                     15
    Dies not alone, but like a gulf doth draw
    What's near it with it: it is a massy wheel,[1390]
    Fix'd on the summit of the highest mount,[1391]
    To whose huge spokes ten thousand lesser things[1392]
    Are mortised and adjoin'd; which, when it falls,[1393]            20
    Each small annexment, petty consequence,
    Attends the boisterous ruin. Never alone[1394]
    Did the king sigh, but with a general groan.[1395]

    _King._ Arm you, I pray you, to this speedy voyage,[1396]
    For we will fetters put about this fear,[1397]                    25
    Which now goes too free-footed.

    _Ros._ }                        We will haste us.
    _Guil._}

                           [_Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern._[1398]

                           _Enter_ POLONIUS.

    _Pol._  My lord, he's going to his mother's closet:
    Behind the arras I'll convey myself,
    To hear the process; I'll warrant she'll tax him home:[1399]
    And, as you said, and wisely was it said,                         30
    'Tis meet that some more audience than a mother,
    Since nature makes them partial, should o'erhear
    The speech, of vantage. Fare you well, my liege:[1400]
    I'll call upon you ere you go to bed,
    And tell you what I know.

    _King._                   Thanks, dear my lord.[1401]             35

                                                       [_Exit Polonius._

    O, my offence is rank, it smells to heaven;
    It hath the primal eldest curse upon't,[1402]
    A brother's murder. Pray can I not,[1403][1404]
    Though inclination be as sharp as will:[1404][1405]
    My stronger guilt defeats my strong intent,[1406]                 40
    And like a man to double business bound,
    I stand in pause where I shall first begin,
    And both neglect. What if this cursed hand[1407]
    Were thicker than itself with brother's blood,
    Is there not rain enough in the sweet heavens                     45
    To wash it white as snow? Whereto serves mercy
    But to confront the visage of offence?
    And what's in prayer but this twofold force,
    To be forestalled ere we come to fall,
    Or pardon'd being down? Then I'll look up;[1408]                  50
    My fault is past. But O, what form of prayer[1409]
    Can serve my turn? 'Forgive me my foul murder?'[1410]
    That cannot be, since I am still possess'd
    Of those effects for which I did the murder,[1411]
    My crown, mine own ambition and my queen.                         55
    May one be pardon'd and retain the offence?[1412]
    In the corrupted currents of this world[1413]
    Offence's gilded hand may shove by justice,[1414]
    And oft 'tis seen the wicked prize itself[1415]
    Buys out the law: but 'tis not so above;                          60
    There is no shuffling, there the action lies
    In his true nature, and we ourselves compell'd[1416]
    Even to the teeth and forehead of our faults
    To give in evidence. What then? what rests?
    Try what repentance can: what can it not?                         65
    Yet what can it when one can not repent?[1417]
    O wretched state! O bosom black as death!
    O limed soul, that struggling to be free
    Art more engaged! Help, angels! make assay![1418]
    Bow, stubborn knees, and, heart with strings of steel,[1419]      70
    Be soft as sinews of the new-born babe!
    All may be well.                        [_Retires and kneels._[1420]

                            _Enter_ HAMLET.

    _Ham._ Now might I do it pat, now he is praying;[1421]
    And now I'll do't: and so he goes to heaven:[1422]
    And so am I revenged. That would be scann'd:[1423]                75
    A villain kills my father; and for that,
    I, his sole son, do this same villain send[1424]
    To heaven.[1425]
    O, this is hire and salary, not revenge.[1426]
    He took my father grossly, full of bread,[1427]                   80
    With all his crimes broad blown, as flush as May;[1428]
    And how his audit stands who knows save heaven?
    But in our circumstance and course of thought,
    'Tis heavy with him: and am I then revenged,[1429]
    To take him in the purging of his soul,                           85
    When he is fit and season'd for his passage?[1430]
    No.[1431]
    Up, sword, and know thou a more horrid hent:[1432]
    When he is drunk asleep, or in his rage,[1433]
    Or in the incestuous pleasure of his bed;[1434]                   90
    At game, a-swearing, or about some act[1435]
    That has no relish of salvation in 't;
    Then trip him, that his heels may kick at heaven[1436]
    And that his soul may be as damn'd and black
    As hell, whereto it goes. My mother stays:                        95
    This physic but prolongs thy sickly days.                   [_Exit._

    _King._ [_Rising_] My words fly up, my thoughts remain below:[1437]
    Words without thoughts never to heaven go.                  [_Exit._


SCENE IV. _The Queen's closet._

                  _Enter_ QUEEN _and_ POLONIUS.[1438]

    _Pol._ He will come straight. Look you lay home to him:[1439]
    Tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear with,[1440]
    And that your grace hath screen'd and stood between[1441]
    Much heat and him. I'll sconce me even here.[1442]
    Pray you, be round with him.

    _Ham._                   [_Within_] Mother, mother, mother![1443]  5

    _Queen._ I'll warrant you; fear me not. Withdraw, I[1444][1445][1446]
    hear him coming.[1445]

                                     [_Polonius hides behind the arras._

                         _Enter_ HAMLET.[1447]

    _Ham._ Now, mother, what's the matter?

    _Queen._ Hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended.

    _Ham._ Mother, you have my father much offended.                  10

    _Queen._ Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue.

    _Ham._ Go, go, you question with a wicked tongue.[1448]

    _Queen._ Why, how now, Hamlet!

    _Ham._                         What's the matter now?[1449]

    _Queen._ Have you forgot me?

    _Ham._                       No, by the rood, not so:
    You are the queen, your husband's brother's wife;                 15
    And--would it were not so!--you are my mother.[1450]

    _Queen._ Nay, then, I'll set those to you that can speak.[1451]

    _Ham._ Come, come, and sit you down; you shall not budge;[1452]
    You go not till I set you up a glass[1453][1454]
    Where you may see the inmost part of you.[1454][1455]             20

    _Queen._ What wilt thou do? thou wilt not murder me?
    Help, help, ho![1456][1457]

    _Pol._ [_Behind_] What, ho! help, help, help![1457][1458]

    _Ham._ [_Drawing_] How now! a rat? Dead, for a ducat, dead![1457]

                                [_Makes a pass through the arras._[1459]

    _Pol._            [_Behind_] O, I am slain!       [_Falls and dies._

    _Queen._                         O me, what hast thou done?[1460]  25

    _Ham._ Nay, I know not: is it the king?[1461]

    _Queen._ O, what a rash and bloody deed is this![1462]

    _Ham._ A bloody deed! almost as bad, good mother,
    As kill a king, and marry with his brother.

    _Queen._ As kill a king!

    _Ham._                   Ay, lady, 'twas my word.[1463]           30

                           [_Lifts up the arras and discovers Polonius._

    Thou wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewell![1464]
    I took thee for thy better: take thy fortune;[1465]
    Thou find'st to be too busy is some danger.
    Leave wringing of your hands: peace! sit you down,
    And let me wring your heart: for so I shall,                      35
    If it be made of penetrable stuff;
    If damned custom have not brass'd it so,[1466]
    That it be proof and bulwark against sense.[1467]

    _Queen._  What have I done, that thou darest wag thy tongue
    In noise so rude against me?

    _Ham._                        Such an act                         40
    That blurs the grace and blush of modesty,
    Calls virtue hypocrite, takes off the rose[1468]
    From the fair forehead of an innocent love,
    And sets a blister there; makes marriage vows[1469]
    As false as dicers' oaths: O, such a deed                         45
    As from the body of contraction plucks
    The very soul, and sweet religion makes
    A rhapsody of words: heaven's face doth glow;[1470][1471]
    Yea, this solidity and compound mass,[1471][1472]
    With tristful visage, as against the doom,[1473]
    Is thought-sick at the act.                                       50

    _Queen._                    Ay me, what act,[1474][1475]
    That roars so loud and thunders in the index?[1475]

    _Ham._ Look here, upon this picture, and on this,
    The counterfeit presentment of two brothers.
    See what a grace was seated on this brow;[1476]                   55
    Hyperion's curls, the front of Jove himself,
    An eye like Mars, to threaten and command;[1477]
    A station like the herald Mercury
    New-lighted on a heaven-kissing hill;[1478]
    A combination and a form indeed,[1479]                            60
    Where every god did seem to set his seal
    To give the world assurance of a man:
    This was your husband. Look you now, what follows:
    Here is your husband; like a mildew'd ear,[1480]
    Blasting his wholesome brother. Have you eyes?[1481]              65
    Could you on this fair mountain leave to feed,
    And batten on this moor? Ha! have you eyes?[1482]
    You cannot call it love, for at your age
    The hey-day in the blood is tame, it's humble,[1483]
    And waits upon the judgement: and what judgement                  70
    Would step from this to this? Sense sure you have,[1484][1485]
    Else could you not have motion: but sure that sense[1485][1486]
    Is apoplex'd: for madness would not err,[1485]
    Nor sense to ecstasy was ne'er so thrall'd[1485]
    But it reserved some quantity of choice,[1485]                    75
    To serve in such a difference. What devil was't[1485]
    That thus hath cozen'd you at hoodman-blind?[1487]
    Eyes without feeling, feeling without sight,[1488]
    Ears without hands or eyes, smelling sans all,[1488]
    Or but a sickly part of one true sense[1488]                      80
    Could not so mope.[1488][1489]
    O shame! where is thy blush? Rebellious hell,[1489][1490]
    If thou canst mutine in a matron's bones,[1491]
    To flaming youth let virtue be as wax
    And melt in her own fire: proclaim no shame                       85
    When the compulsive ardour gives the charge,[1492]
    Since frost itself as actively doth burn,
    And reason panders will.[1493]

    _Queen._                 O Hamlet, speak no more:
    Thou turn'st mine eyes into my very soul,[1494]
    And there I see such black and grained spots[1495]                90
    As will not leave their tinct.[1496]

    _Ham._                         Nay, but to live
    In the rank sweat of an enseamed bed,[1497]
    Stew'd in corruption, honeying and making love
    Over the nasty sty,--

    _Queen._              O, speak to me no more;[1498]
    These words like daggers enter in my ears;[1499]                  95
    No more, sweet Hamlet!

    _Ham._                 A murderer and a villain;
    A slave that is not twentieth part the tithe[1500]
    Of your precedent lord; a vice of kings;
    A cutpurse of the empire and the rule,[1501]
    That from a shelf the precious diadem stole                      100
    And put it in his pocket!

    _Queen._                  No more![1502]

    _Ham._ A king of shreds and patches--

                          _Enter_ Ghost.[1503]

    Save me, and hover o'er me with your wings,[1504]
    You heavenly guards! What would your gracious figure?[1505]

    _Queen._ Alas, he's mad![1506]                                   105

    _Ham._ Do you not come your tardy son to chide,
    That, lapsed in time and passion, lets go by[1507]
    The important acting of your dread command?
    O, say![1508]

    _Ghost._ Do not forget: this visitation                          110
    Is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose.
    But look, amazement on thy mother sits:
    O, step between her and her fighting soul:[1509]
    Conceit in weakest bodies strongest works:
    Speak to her, Hamlet.

    _Ham._                How is it with you, lady?                  115

    _Queen._ Alas, how is't with you,
    That you do bend your eye on vacancy[1510]
    And with the incorporal air do hold discourse?[1511]
    Forth at your eyes your spirits wildly peep;
    And, as the sleeping soldiers in the alarm,                      120
    Your bedded hairs, like life in excrements,[1512]
    Start up and stand an end. O gentle son,[1513]
    Upon the heat and flame of thy distemper
    Sprinkle cool patience. Whereon do you look?

    _Ham._ On him, on him! Look you, how pale he glares![1514]       125
    His form and cause conjoin'd, preaching to stones,[1515]
    Would make them capable. Do not look upon me,[1516]
    Lest with this piteous action you convert
    My stern effects: then what I have to do[1517]
    Will want true colour; tears perchance for blood.                130

    _Queen._ To whom do you speak this?

    _Ham._                              Do you see nothing there?[1518]

    _Queen._ Nothing at all; yet all that is I see.[1519]

    _Ham._ Nor did you nothing hear?

    _Queen._                         No, nothing but ourselves.

    _Ham._ Why, look you there! look, how it steals away![1520]
    My father, in his habit as he lived![1521]                       135
    Look, where he goes, even now, out at the portal![1522]

                                                          [_Exit Ghost._

    _Queen._ This is the very coinage of your brain:
    This bodiless creation ecstasy[1523]
    Is very cunning in.[1523]

    _Ham._              Ecstasy![1524]
    My pulse, as yours, doth temperately keep time,                  140
    And makes as healthful music: it is not madness
    That I have utter'd: bring me to the test,[1525]
    And I the matter will re-word, which madness[1526]
    Would gambol from. Mother, for love of grace,[1527]
    Lay not that flattering unction to your soul,[1528]              145
    That not your trespass but my madness speaks:
    It will but skin and film the ulcerous place,
    Whiles rank corruption, mining all within,[1529]
    Infects unseen. Confess yourself to heaven;
    Repent what's past, avoid what is to come,[1530]                 150
    And do not spread the compost on the weeds,[1531]
    To make them ranker. Forgive me this my virtue,[1532][1533][1534]
    For in the fatness of these pursy times[1533][1535]
    Virtue itself of vice must pardon beg,[1533]
    Yea, curb and woo for leave to do him good.[1533][1536]          155

    _Queen._ O Hamlet, thou hast cleft my heart in twain.[1537]

    _Ham._ O, throw away the worser part of it,[1538]
    And live the purer with the other half.[1539]
    Good night: but go not to my uncle's bed;[1540]
    Assume a virtue, if you have it not.                             160
    That monster, custom, who all sense doth eat,[1541][1542]
    Of habits devil, is angel yet in this,[1541][1542]
    That to the use of actions fair and good[1541]
    He likewise gives a frock or livery,[1541]
    That aptly is put on. Refrain to-night,[1541][1543]              165
    And that shall lend a kind of easiness
    To the next abstinence; the next more easy;[1544]
    For use almost can change the stamp of nature,[1544][1545]
    And either ... the devil, or throw him out[1544][1546]
    With wondrous potency. Once more, good night:[1544]              170
    And when you are desirous to be blest,
    I'll blessing beg of you. For this same lord,

                                          [_Pointing to Polonius._[1547]

    I do repent: but heaven hath pleased it so,[1548]
    To punish me with this, and this with me,[1549]
    That I must be their scourge and minister.                       175
    I will bestow him, and will answer well
    The death I gave him. So, again, good night.
    I must be cruel, only to be kind:[1550]
    Thus bad begins, and worse remains behind.[1550][1551]
    One word more, good lady.[1552]

    _Queen._                  What shall I do?                       180

    _Ham._ Not this, by no means, that I bid you do:
    Let the bloat king tempt you again to bed;[1553]
    Pinch wanton on your cheek, call you his mouse;
    And let him, for a pair of reechy kisses,
    Or paddling in your neck with his damn'd fingers,                185
    Make you to ravel all this matter out,[1554]
    That I essentially am not in madness,
    But mad in craft. 'Twere good you let him know;
    For who, that's but a queen, fair, sober, wise,
    Would from a paddock, from a bat, a gib,[1555]                   190
    Such dear concernings hide? who would do so?[1556]
    No, in despite of sense and secrecy,
    Unpeg the basket on the house's top,
    Let the birds fly, and like the famous ape,
    To try conclusions, in the basket creep[1557]                    195
    And break your own neck down.

    _Queen._ Be thou assured, if words be made of breath
    And breath of life, I have no life to breathe[1558]
    What thou hast said to me.

    _Ham._ I must to England; you know that?

    _Queen._                                      Alack,[1559][1560]  200
    I had forgot: 'tis so concluded on.[1560][1561]

    _Ham._ There's letters seal'd: and my two schoolfellows,[1562]
    Whom I will trust as I will adders fang'd,[1562]
    They bear the mandate; they must sweep my way,[1562]
    And marshal me to knavery. Let it work;[1562][1563]              205
    For 'tis the sport to have the enginer[1562][1564]
    Hoist with his own petar: and't shall go hard[1562][1565]
    But I will delve one yard below their mines,[1562]
    And blow them at the moon: O, 'tis most sweet[1562]
    When in one line two crafts directly meet.[1562][1566]           210
    This man shall set me packing:[1567]
    I'll lug the guts into the neighbour room.
    Mother, good night. Indeed this counsellor[1568]
    Is now most still, most secret and most grave,
    Who was in life a foolish prating knave.[1569]                   215
    Come, sir, to draw toward an end with you.
    Good night, mother.

                 [_Exeunt severally; Hamlet dragging in Polonius._[1570]

FOOTNOTES:

[1007] ACT III. SCENE I.] Q (1676) and Rowe. Omitted in Ff.

A room in the castle] Malone. The Palace. Rowe. Another room in the
same. Capell.

Rosencrantz, and Guildenstern.] Capell. Rosencraus, Guyldensterne,
Lords. Qq. Rosincrance, Guildenstern, and Lords. F₁. Rosincros,
Guildenstar, and Lords. F₂ F₃ F₄ (Guildenstare, F₄).

[1008] _circumstance_] Ff. _conference_ Qq.

[1009] _confusion_] _confesion_ Rowe (ed. 2). _confession_ Pope (in
margin).

[1010] _he will_] _a will_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.

[1011] _Nor ... state._] Continued to Ros. by Jennens.

[1012] _state_] _estate_ Q₆.

[1013] _Niggard of ... of our ... Most free_] _Unapt to ... of our ...
Most free_ Q (1676). _Most free of ... to our ... Niggard_ Hanmer.
_Most free of ... of our ... Niggard_ Warburton. _Niggard of ... to
our ... Most free_ Collier MS.

[1014] _Did ... pastime?_] As in Capell. One line in Qq Ff.

[1015] _assay_] _invite_ Q (1676).

[1016] _To_] _unto_ Hanmer.

[1017] _so_] om. Johnson.

[1018] _o'er-raught_] _ore-raught_ Qq. _ore-wrought_ F₁ F₂. _o're-took_
F₃ F₄. _o'er-rode_ Warburton.

[1019] _about_] Ff. _heere about_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _here about_ Q₆.

[1020] _With ... delights._] Arranged as by Pope. Five lines ending
_hart, ... me, ... inclin'd ... edge, ... delights,_ in Qq. Four lines,
ending _me ... gentlemen, ... on ... delights,_ in Ff.

[1021] _drive ... on to_] _drive ... on To_ Ff. _drive ... into_ Qq.
_urge him to_ Q (1676).

[1022] [Exeunt....] Exeunt Ros. & Guyl. Qq. Exeunt. Ff.

_Gertrude_] Ff. _Gertrard_ Qq.

_too_] Ff. _two_ Qq.

[1023] _hither_] Ff Q₆. _hether_ The rest.

[1024] _he_] _we_ Jennens.

_here_] Q₆. _heere_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _there_ Ff.

[1025] _here Affront Ophelia_] _meet Ophelia here_ Q (1676).

[1026] _Affront ... espials,_] As in Johnson. One line in Ff. One line,
ending _myself,_ in Qq.

[1027] _lawful espials_] Omitted in Qq.

[1028] _Will_] Ff. _Wee'le_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _Wee'll_ Q₆.]

_unseen_] _and unseen_ Q (1676).

[1029] _frankly_] om. Q (1676).

[1030] _no_] Qq. _no,_ F₄. _no._ F₁ F₂ F₃.

[1031] _for your_] Q₂ Q₃ Ff. _for my_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

[1032] _beauties ... virtues_] _beauty ... virtue_ S. Walker conj.

[1033] _shall_] om. Pope.

[1034] _Will_] _May_ Pope.

[Exit Queen.] Theobald. om. Qq Ff.

[1035] _please you_] Qq. _please ye_ Ff.

[1036] [To Ophelia.] To Oph. Johnson.

[1037] _loneliness_] _lowlines_ Q₂ Q₃. _lowlinesse_ Q₄ Q₅.

_to blame_] Q₆ F₃ F₄. _too blame_ The rest.

[1038] _sugar_] Qq. _surge_ Ff.

[1039] [Aside] First marked by Pope.

_'tis too_] Qq. _'tis_ Ff. _it is but too_ Hanmer.

[1040] Pol.] Erased in Collier MS. See note (II).

_let's_] om. Qq.

[Exeunt....] Capell. Exeunt. Ff. om. Qq. Exeunt all but Ophelia. Rowe.

[1041] SCENE II. Pope.

Enter Hamlet.] As in Ff. After _burthen,_ line 54, in Qq. Enter Hamlet,
with a book in his hand. Hunter conj. He would transfer the soliloquy
to II. 2. 169.

[1042] _slings_] _sling_ Campbell. _stings_ Fleischer (S. Walker conj.)

_slings and arrows_] _stings and harrows_ Anon. conj. (Misc. Obs. on
Hamlet, 1752). _stings and horrors_ Anon. MS.

[1043] _a sea of_] _a siege of_ Theobald conj. (withdrawn). _th' assay
of_ or _a 'say of_ Theobald conj. _assailing_ Hanmer conj. _assail
of_ Warburton. _assays of_ Keightley conj. _the seat of_ Bailey conj.
_assay of_ Brae conj.

[1044] _opposing_] _a poniard_ or _deposing_ Bailey conj.

_them?_] Pope. _them,_ Q₂ Q₃. _them:_ Q₄ Q₅ Ff Q₆. om. S. Evans conj.

[1045] _die: to sleep; No_] _die to sleepe No_ Qq (dye Q₆). _dye, to
sleepe No_ F₁. _dye, to sleepe: No_ F₂. _dye, to sleep No_ F₃ F₄.
_die,--to sleep--No_ Pope.

[1046] _more;_] F₁ Q₆. _more,_ Q₂ Q₃. _more:_ Q₄ Q₅ F₂ F₃ F₄. _more?_
Capell.

_say we end_] _straightway end_ Bailey conj.

[1047] _to,_] _to;_ Qq. _too?_ F₁. _to?_ F₂ F₃. {to.} F₄.

[1048] _wish'd. To_] Ff. _wisht to_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _wisht, to_ Q₆.

[1049] _we have_] _he have_ F₂. _he hath_ F₃ F₄.

_shuffled_] _shuffel'd_ F₁ F₂.

_coil_] _spoil_ Mason conj. _vail_ or _clay_ Elze conj.

[1050] _Must ... life;_] As three lines ending _pause ... calamity ...
life;_ S. Walker conj.

[1051] _whips ... time_] _quips ... time_ Grey conj. _whips ... th'
time_ Warburton conj. _whips ... tyrants or quips ... title_ Johnson
conj. _whips ... o' the times_ Steevens conj. _scorns of weapon'd time_
Becket conj. _scorns of whiphand time_ Id. conj. (withdrawn).

[1052] _proud_] Q₅ Q₆. _proude_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _poore_ F₁ F₂. _poor_ F₃ F₄.

[1053] _pangs_] _pang_ Pope.

_despised love, the_] _despiz'd love, the_ Q₂ Q₃. _office, and the_ Q₄
Q₅. _dispriz'd love, the_ Ff. _despised love, and the_ Q₆. _mispriz'd
love, the_ Collier MS. (erased). See note (II).

[1054] _When he_] _When_ Q₄ Q₅. _When as_ Q₆.

_quietus_] _quietas_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄.

[1055] _who would fardels_] _who'd these fardels_ Grant White (S.
Walker conj.)

_fardels_] Qq. _these fardles_ Ff.

[1056] _grunt_] _groan_ Q (1676) and Pope.

[1057] _The undiscover'd_] Qq. _The undiscovered_ Ff. _That
undiscover'd_ Pope. _In the undiscover'd_ Keightley.

_bourn_] Capell. _bourne_ Pope. _borne_ Qq F₁ F₂. _born_ F₃ F₄.

[1058] _returns, puzzles_] _returnes. Puzels_ F₁.

[1059] _of us all_] (Q₁) Ff. om. Qq.

[1060] _hue_] F₃ F₄. _hiew_ Qq. _hew_ F₁ F₂.

[1061] _sicklied_] Ff Q₆. _sickled_ The rest.

[1062] _pitch_] Qq. _pith_ Ff. See note (XVI).

[1063] _awry_] Qq. _away_ Ff.

[1064] [Seeing Oph. Rowe.

[1065] _Ophelia!_] _Ophelia?_ Ff. _Ophelia,_ Qq.

_orisons_] Theobald. _orizons_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅ F₁. _horizons_ F₂ F₃ F₄.
_orizons?_ Q₆. _oraisons_ Rowe.

[1066] _remember'd._] _remembred?_ Q₆.

[1067] _you: well, well, well._] Ff. _you well._ Q₂ Q₃. _you: well._ Q₄
Q₅. _you, well._ Q₆.

[1068] _long_] om. Q (1676). _much_ Pope.

[1069] _No, not I_] Qq. _No, no_ Ff. _No_ Pope.

[1070] _No ... aught._] Arranged as by Capell. One line in Qq Ff.

[1071] _you know_] Qq. _I know_ Ff.

[1072] _the things_] Ff. _these things_ Qq.

_rich: their perfume lost,_] Q₄ Q₅ Q₆. _rich, their perfume lost,_ Q₂
Q₃. _rich, then perfume left:_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _rich, than perfume left:_ F₄.
_rich: that perfume lost,_ Rowe.

[1073] _lord?_] Capell. _lord._ Qq Ff. _lord--_ Rowe.

[1074] _your honesty_] Ff. _you_ Qq.

[1075] _your honesty ... beauty._] _you should admit your honesty to no
discourse with your beauty._ Johnson conj.

[1076] _commerce_] Q₅ Q₆ F₄. _comerse_ Q₂ Q₃. _comerce_ Q₄ F₁ F₂ F₃.
_converse_ Anon. conj.

[1077] _with_] Qq. _your_ Ff.

[1078] _into_] _in_ Q₅ _to_ Q₆.

_his_] _its_ Pope.

[1079] _sometime_] _sometimes_ F₃ F₄.

[1080] _inoculate_] _innocculate_ F₁. _inocculate_ F₂ F₃. _inocualte_
F₄. _euocutat_ Q₂ Q₃. _euacuat_ Q₄. _euacuate_ Q₅. _evacuate_ Q₆.

[1081] _I loved you not._] _I did love you once._ Rowe (ed. 2).

[1082] _to_] Ff. om. Qq.

[1083] _at my beck_] _on my back_ Long MS. _at my back_ Collier MS.

[1084] _in, imagination to_] Qq. _in imagination, to_ Ff. _in name,
imagination to_ Warburton.

[1085] _heaven and earth_] (Q₁) Ff. _earth and heaven_ Qq.

[1086] _all_] (Q₁) Ff. om. Qq.

[1087] _Let ... house._] Prose in Ff. Two lines, the first ending
_him,_ in Qq.

[1088] _no where_] Qq. _no way_ Ff.

[1089] _plague_] _plage_ Q₄.

[1090] _go_] Ff. om. Qq.

[1091] _too_] Ff Q₆. _to_ The rest.

[1092] _O_] Ff. om. Qq.

[1093] _paintings_] (Q₁) Qq. _pratlings_ F₁. _pratling_ F₂ F₃ F₄.
_painting_ Pope.

_too_] Ff. om. Qq.

[1094] _God_] _Nature_ Q (1676).

_hath_] Qq. _has_ Ff.

_face_] (Q₁) Qq. _pace_ Ff.

_yourselves_] _your selves_ Q₅ Q₆. _your selfes_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _your selfe_
F₁ F₂. _your self_ F₃ F₄.

[1095] _you jig_] _gig_ Q₆. _fig_ (Q₁).

_jig_] Q (1676). _gig_ Qq. _gidge_ Ff.

_you amble_] Ff. _and amble_ Qq.

_lisp,_] Q (1676) F₄. _lispe,_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _list_ Qq.

_and nick-name_] Ff. you _nickname_ Qq.

[1096] _God's_] _Heavens_ Q (1676).

[1097] _wantonness your ignorance_] _ignorance your wantonness_ Anon.
conj.

_your ignorance_] (Q₁) Ff. _ignorance_ Qq.

[1098] _Go to_] Q₅. _Goe to_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _Go too_ F₁ Q₆. _Goe_ F₂. _Go_
F₃ F₄.

[1099] _no more marriages_] (Q₁) Ff. _no mo marriage_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _no
moe marriages_ Q₆.

[1100] _live_] om. F₂ F₃ F₄.

[1101] [Exit.] Qq. Exit Hamlet. Ff.

[1102] _o'erthrown_] _othrowne_ Q₄ Q₅.

[1103] _soldier's, scholar's_] _scholar's, soldier's_ Hanmer and
Staunton, from (Q₁).

_scholar's,_] _schollers,_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _scholers,_ Q₅. _scholars,_ Q₆.
_scholiers:_ F₁. _schollers?_ F₂. _schollars?_ F₃. _scholars!_ F₄. om.
Jennens.

[1104] _expectancy_] F₃ F₄. _expectansie_ F₁ F₂. _expectation_ Qq.

[1105] _And I_] Qq. _Have I_ F₁ F₂. _I am_ F₃ F₄.

[1106] _music_] _musickt_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄.

_vows,_] Pointed as by Hanmer. _vowes;_ Qq. _vowes:_ or _vows:_ Ff.

[1107] _that noble_] Ff. _what noble_ Qq.

[1108] _jangled, out of tune_] Capell. _jangled out of time,_ Qq.
_jangled out of tune,_ Ff.

[1109] _unmatch'd_] _unmarcht_ Q₅. _unsnatch'd_ Jennens.

_form_] _forme_ Qq F₁. _fortune_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

_feature_] Ff. _stature_ Qq. _statute_ Q (1695).

[1110] _To have_] _T' have_ Qq Ff.

_see!_] _see._ Exit. Qq and Elze.

Re-enter....] Capell. Enter.... Qq Ff.

[1111] SCENE III. Pope.

_Love!_] Q₆. _Love,_ Q₂ Q₃. _Love:_ Q₄ Q₅. _Love?_ Ff.

[1112] _Nor_] _For_ Q₆.

[1113] _There's something_] _Something's_ Pope.

_soul_] _soule?_ F₁.

[1114] _for to_] Qq. _to_ F₁ F₂. _how to_ F₃ F₄.

[1115] _it_] om. Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

[1116] _something-settled_] Hyphened by Warburton. _sometime-settled_
Daniel conj.

[1117] _Whereon ... on't?_] Arranged as in Ff. Three lines, ending
_beating ... himselfe ... on't?_ in Qq.

[1118] _brains_] F₃ F₄. _braines_ Qq F₁ F₂. _brain_ Collier MS.
_brain's_ Grant White.

[1119] _but ... grief_] Arranged as in Ff. One line in Q₂ Q₃.

[1120] _do I_] _I doe_ Q₆.

[1121] _his grief_] Q₂ Q₃. _it_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆, reading _But ... of it_ as
one line. _this greefe_ Ff.

[1122] [Enter Ophelia. Elze.

[1123] [Exit Ophelia. Elze.

[1124] _grief_] _griefe_ Qq. _greefes_ F₁. _griefes_ F₂. _griefs_ F₃ F₄.

[1125] _placed, so please you_] _plac'd so, please you_ F₁ F₂.

[1126] _unwatch'd_] Ff. _unmatcht_ Qq.

[1127] SCENE II.] Capell. SCENE IV. Pope. om. Ff.

A hall....] A Hall, in the same, fitted as for a Play. Capell.

and Players.] and the Players. (Q₁). and three of the Players. Qq. and
two or three of the Players. Ff.

[1128] _pronounced_] _pronoun'd_ Q₂ Q₃.

[1129] _trippingly on_] _smoothly from_ Q (1676).

[1130] _your players_] (Q₁) Ff. _our players_ Qq.

_lief_] Steevens (1793). _live_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅ F₁ F₂. _lieve_ Q₆ F₃ F₄.

_spoke_] Qq. _had spoke_ Ff.

[1131] _Nor_] _And_ Pope.

_much with your_] Qq. _much your_ Ff. _much, your_ Caldecott.

[1132] _whirlwind of your passion_] Qq. _the whirle-winde of passion_
Ff. _whirlwind of passion_ Collier. _the whirlwind of your passion_
Staunton.

[1133] _hear_] Qq. _see_ Ff.

_robustious_] _robustous_ Q (1676) F₄.

[1134] _periwig-pated_] Q (1676). _perwig-pated_ Qq. _Pery-wig-pated_
F₁. _Pery-wig-parted_ F₂. _Perriwig-parted_ F₃ F₄.

_to tatters_] Ff. _to totters_ Qq. om. Q (1676).

[1135] _split_] Ff. _spleet_ Qq.

[1136] _would_] (Q₁) Qq. _could_ Ff.

[1137] First Play.] 1. P. Capell. Player. or Play. Qq Ff.

[1138] _suit_] Hanmer. _sute_ Qq F₁ F₃ F₄. _sure_ F₂.

[1139] _o'erstep_] _ore-steppe_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _ore-step_ Q₅ Q₆. _ore-stop_
Ff. _ore-top_ Long MS.

[1140] _overdone_] _ore-doone_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _ore-done_ Q₅ Q₆.

[1141] _at the first_] _at first_ Q₅ Q₆.

[1142] _her own feature_] _her feature_ Qq.

_scorn_] _sin_ Bailey conj.

[1143] _the very_] _every_ Mason conj.

_age_] _face_ or _page_ Johnson conj. _eye_ Taylor conj. MS.

_the very age_] _the visage_ Bailey conj.

[1144] _tardy_] _trady_ Q₄.

_off_] _of_ Q₆, and Mason conj.

_pressure_] _posture_ Bailey conj.

[1145] _though it make_] _though it makes_ Qq.

[1146] _the censure_] _in the censure_ Long MS.

_the which one_] Ff. _which one_ Qq. _one of which_ Hanmer.

[1147] _o'erweigh_] _ore-weigh_ Qq. _o're-way_ F₁. _ore-sway_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[1148] _praise_] Ff Q₆. _praysd_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _praisd_ Q₅.

[1149] _neither ... nor man,_] Put within brackets, as an
interpolation, by Warburton.

[1150] _accent of Christians_] _accent of Christian_ Pope.

_nor the_] _or the_ Rowe.

[1151] _nor man_] Qq. _Nor Turke_ (Q₁). _or Norman_ Ff. _nor Mussulman_
Farmer conj. _or man_ Pope. _or Turk_ Grant White.

[1152] _men_] _them_ Rann (Theobald conj. withdrawn). _the men_ Farmer
conj.

[1153] _sir_] Ff. om. Qq.

[1154] _themselves_] _of themselves_ F₃ F₄.

[1155] _too_] _to_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.

[1156] [Exeunt Players.] F₂ F₃ F₄. Exit Players. F₁. Omitted in Qq.

Enter ... Rosencrantz, and Guildenstern.] As in Ff. Enter ...
Guyldensterne, & Rosencrans. Qq (after _work?_ line 42).

[1157] SCENE IV.] Warburton.

[1158] _too_] Ff Q₆. _to_ The rest.

[1159] [Exit Polonius.] Ff. om. Qq.

[1160] Ros. Guil.] Both. Ff. Ros. Qq.

_We will_] Ff. _I_ Qq.

[Exeunt....] Exeunt they two. Q₂ Q₃. Exeunt those two. Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.
Exeunt. Ff.

[1161] SCENE V. Pope.

_What ho!_] _What hoe,_ Q₆. _What hoa,_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _What ho,_ F₄. _What
howe_, Q₂ Q₃. _What how,_ Q₄ Q₅.

Enter Horatio.] As in Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. After line 46 in Ff. Omitted in Q₆.

[1162] _sweet lord_] _my lord_ Q (1676).

[1163] _coped_] _copt_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _cop't_ Q₆. _coap'd_ Ff. _met_ Q
(1676).

[1164] _lord,--_] _lord--_ Rowe. _lord._ Qq Ff.

[1165] _no revenue hast_] _hast no revenue_ Q (1676).

[1166] _thee?_] Q₆. _thee,_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _thee._ Ff.

_Why_] om. Pope.

[1167] _lick_] Q₄ Q₅. _licke_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₆. _like_ Ff.

_absurd_] _obsurd_ Q₄ Q₅.

[1168] _pregnant_] _begging_ Collier MS. (in pencil). See note (II).

[1169] _fawning._] _fawning:_ Q₆. _fauning;_ Q₂ Q₃. _fauning_, Q₄.
_fawning,_ Q₅. _faining._ F₁ F₂ F₃. _feigning._ F₄.

_hear?_] _heare?_ Q₆. _heare,_ or _hear,_ The rest.

[1170] _dear_] _clear_ Johnson conj.

_her_] Qq. _my_ Ff.

[1171] _distinguish, ... Hath_] Ff. _distinguish her election, S'hath_
Qq (_Shath_ Q₄ Q₅. _Sh'ath_ Q₆).

[1172] _fortune's_] _fortune_ F₃ F₄.

[1173] _Hast_] Qq. _Hath_ Ff.

[1174] _commingled_] _co-mingled_ Ff. _comedled_ Qq. _commedled_ Q
(1676, 1683, 1695). _commended_ Q (1703). _comêl'd_ Capell conj.

[1175] _stop_] _stops_ Q (1676).

[1176] _of heart_] _of hearts_ Q (1676).

[1177] _thee of_] Qq. _thee, of_ Ff.

[1178] _a-foot_] _on foot_ Q₆.

[1179] _very_] om. F₂ F₃ F₄.

_thy_] Qq. _my_ Ff.

[1180] _my_] Qq. _mine_ Ff.

_his occulted_] _then his hidden_ Q (1676). _his occult_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[1181] _unkennel_] _discover_ Q (1676).

[1182] _stithy_] Qq. _stythe_ F₁. _styth_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _smithy_ Theobald.

_heedful_] Q(1676) F₄. _heedfull_ Qq. _needfull_ F₁ F₂ F₃.

[1183] _face,_] _face?_ F₂.

[1184] _judgements_] _judgement_ F₂.

[1185] _In_] Qq. _To_ Ff.

[1186] _he_] Ff. _a_ Qq.

[1187] _detecting_] Ff. _detected_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _detection_ Q₆.

[1188] SCENE VI. Pope. SCENE V. Warburton.

_They are_] _They're_ Pope.

[1189] Danish march. A flourish. Enter ... the Guard ... torches.]
Capell, substantially. Enter ... his Guard ... torches. Danish March.
Sound a Flourish. Ff (after line 84). Enter Trumpets and Kettle
Drummes, King, Queene, Polonius, Ophelia. Qq (after line 84).

[1190] _our_] _my_ F₃ F₄.

[1191] _Excellent ... say?_] Prose in Ff. Irregular lines in Qq.

[1192] _dish: I_] _dish I_ Q (1676).

[1193] _mine now. My lord,_] Johnson. _mine now my lord._ Qq. _mine.
Now my lord,_ Ff.

[To Polonius] Rowe.

[1194] _i' the_] _in the_ Q₆.

[1195] _did I_] Qq. _I did_ Ff.

[1196] _What_] Qq. _And what_ Ff.

[1197] _Capitol_] F₁ F₄. _Capitall_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _Capitoll_ F₂ Q₆ F₃.

[1198] _stay_] _wait_ Q (1676).

_patience_] _pleasure_ Johnson conj. _patents_ Becket conj.

[1199] _dear_] _deere_ Q₂ Q₃. _deare_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆. _good_ Ff.

[1200] _metal_] _metall_ Q₆. _mettle_ The rest.

[1201] [To the King] Capell.

_O, ho!_] _Oh, oh,_ Q₄ Q₅.

_that?_] Ff Q₆. _that._ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.

[1202] [Lying....] Rowe. Seating himself at Ophelia's feet. Capell
(after line 103).

[1203] Ham. _I mean ... lord._] Omitted in Qq.

[1204] _upon_] _in_ Capell.

[1205] _country_] _contrary_ (Q₁). _contray_ Singer (ed. 1), a misprint.

_matters_] _manners_ Johnson conj.

[1206] _maids'_] _maydes_ or _maids_ Qq Ff. _a maid's_ Rowe.

[1207] _lord._] Qq. _lord?_ Ff.

[1208] _O God,_] om. Q (1676). _Oh!_ Johnson.

[1209] _within 's_] Qq Ff. _within these_ Pope.

[1210] _twice_] om. Hanmer. _quite_ Ingleby conj.

[1211] _devil_] _deule_ Q₂ Q₃.

[1212] _for ... sables_] (Q₁) Qq Ff. _for ... ermyn_ Hanmer. _'fore ...
sable_ Warburton. _for ... sabell_ Anon. conj. (The Critic, 1854, p.
317).

[1213] _have_] _not have_ Keightley. _leave_ Lloyd conj. _leave him_
Anon. conj. _have ne'er_ Anon. conj.

_a suit_] _no suit_ Becket conj.

[1214] _by'r lady_] _by'r-lady_ F₄. _byr-lady_ F₁. _ber Lady_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄
Q₆. _ber Ladie_ Q₅. _berlady_ F₂ F₃. om. Q (1676).

[1215] _he ... he_] Ff. _a ... a_ Qq.

[1216] Hautboys ... love.] Ff, substantially. The Trumpets sounds.
Dumbe show followes. Enter a King and a Queene, the Queene embracing
him, and he her, he takes her vp, and declines his head vpon her necke,
he lyes him downe vppon a bancke of flowers, she seeing him asleepe,
leaues him: anon come in an other man, takes off his crowne, kisses
it, pours poyson in the sleepers eares, and leaues him: the Queene
returnes, finds the King dead, makes passionate action, the poysner
with some three or foure come in againe, seeme to condole with her, the
dead body is carried away, the poysner wooes the Queene with gifts,
shee seemes harsh awhile, but in the end accepts loue. Qq ( ... anon
comes ... comes in ... Q₄ Q₅ Q₆). Theobald substitutes 'a Duke and a
Dutchess, with regal coronets,' for 'a King and a Queen'.

and a] and Ff.

and he her] om. Ff.

exit.] exits. Ff.

[Exeunt.] Ff. om. Qq.

[During the dumb show King and Queen whisper confidentially to each
other and so do not see it. Halliwell conj.

[1217] SCENE VII. Pope. SCENE VI. Warburton.

[1218] _Marry_] om. Q(1676).

_this is_] Ff. _this_ Q₂ Q₃. _tis_ Q₄. _it is_ Q₅ Q₆.

_miching mallecho_] Malone. _myching Mallico_ (Q₁). _munching Mallico_
Qq. _miching Malicho_ Ff. _miching Malhechor_ Warburton. _miching
Malbecco_ Grey conj. _munching Malicho_ Capell. _mimicking Malbecco_
Farmer conj. _mucho malhecho_ Keightley (Maginn conj.)

_it_] Qq. _that_ Ff.

[1219] _Belike_] _Be like_ F₂.

_play._] Qq. _play?_ Ff.

Enter Prologue.] As in Theobald. After _fellow,_ line 132, in Qq. After
_play,_ line 138, in Ff.

[1220] _this fellow_] Qq. _these fellowes_ Ff.

[1221] _counsel_] Omitted in Qq.

[1222] _he_] Pope, _a_ Qq. _they_ Ff.

_tell us_] _shew us_ Q (1676).

[1223] _you'll_] _you will_ Qq.

_not you_] _not_ Q (1676).

[1224] _mark_] _make_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[1225] _posy_] _posie_ Qq F₄. _poesie_ F₁ F₂ F₃.

[1226] Enter ...] Enter King and Queen, Players. Pope. Enter King and
Queene. Qq. Enter King and his Queene. F₁ F₂. Enter King, and Queen. F₃
F₄. Enter Duke, and Dutchess, Players. Theobald, from (Q₁).

[1227] P. King.] Steevens (1778). King. Qq Ff.

[1228] _Phbus' ... Tellus'_] Apostrophes inserted by Pope.

[1229] _cart_] _carr_ Q (1676). _car_ Rowe.

[1230] _orbed_] Ff. _orb'd the_ Qq.

[1231] _borrowed_] Qq Ff. _borrow'd_ Q (1676) and Capell.

[1232] _times twelve thirties_] Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅ F₁. _time, twelve thirties_
F₂ F₃ F₄. _twelve times thirty_ Q₆. _times twelve thirty_ Hanmer.

[1233] _commutual in most_] _infolding them in_ Q (1676).

[1234] P. Queen.] Steevens (1778). Quee. or Que. Qq F₂ F₃. Queen. F₄.
Bap. or Bapt. F₁.

[1235] _from cheer and_] _different_ Q (1676).

_your_] _our_ Q₂ Q₃.

_former_] _forme_ F₁.

[1236] _must: For_] Ff. _must. For women feare too much, even as they
love, And_ Qq. See note (XVII).

[1237] HOLDS] Ff. HOLD Qq.

[1238] IN NEITHER AUGHT] _In neither ought_ Ff. _Eyther none, in
neither ought_ Qq. _'Tis either none_ Pope. _In neither: aught_ Hunter
conj. _Either in nought_ Anon. conj.

[1239] _love_] _Lord_ Q₂ Q₃.

_is, proof hath made_] _has been, proof makes_ Q (1676).

[1240] _sized_] _ciz'd_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₆. _ciz'st_ Q₄ Q₅. _siz'd_ F₁. _siz_ F₂.
_fixt_ F₃ F₄. _great_ Q (1676).

[1241] _Where love ... there._] Qq. Omitted in Ff.

[1242] _littlest_] Q₆. _litlest_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _smallest_ Q (1676).

[1243] _operant_] _working_ Q (1676).

_their functions_] Qq. _my functions_ Ff.

[1244] _fair_] _fare_ Q₄.

[1245] _kind_] Q₆. _kind,_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _kinde._ F₁. _kind._ F₂ F₃ F₄.
_a kind_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[1246] _thou--_] Ff. _thou._ Qq.

[1247] _kill'd_] _kill_ Theobald.

[1248] [Aside] Capell.

_Wormwood, wormwood._] Ff. _O wormewood, wormewood!_ (Q₁). _That's
wormwood._ Qq (in the margin).

[1249] P. Queen.] Bapt. Ff. om. Qq.

[1250] _thrift_] _Trift_ F₂.

[1251] _husband dead_] _lord that's dead_ (Q₁) Staunton.

[1252] _you think_] Pointed as in Qq. _you. Think_ Ff.

[1253] _but_] _and_ Q (1676).

[1254] _like_] Ff. _the_ Qq.

_fruit_] _fruits_ Q (1676) and Pope.

[1255] _either_] Q₅ Q₆. _eyther_, Q₂ Q₃. _either_, Q₄. _other_ Ff.

[1256] _enactures_] Q₆. _ennactures_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _ennactors_ F₁.
_enactors_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[1257] _joys_] F₄. _joyes_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _joy_ Qq.

_grieves_ F₃ F₄. _greeves_ F₁ F₂. _griefes_ Qq.

[1258] _nor_] _and_ Pope.

_'tis not_] _is it_ Q (1676).

[1259] _lead fortune_] _fortune lead_ Pope. _leads fortune_ Theobald.

_else_] om. Pope.

[1260] _favourite_] _favourites_ F₁.

[1261] _hitherto_] _hither to_ F₂.

[1262] _friend,_] Qq. _friend:_ F₁. _friend?_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[1263] _seasons him_] _sees in him_ Anon. conj.

[1264] _So think_] _Think still_ Q (1676).

[1265] _die thy thoughts_] _thy thoughts dye_ Q (1676).

[1266] _to me give_] Qq. _to give me_ Ff. _oh! give me_ Hanmer. _do
give me_ Seymour conj.

_Nor ... give_] _Let earth not give me_ Anon. conj. (Misc. Obs. on
Hamlet, 1752).

[1267] _To desperation ... scope!_] Qq. Omitted in Ff.

[1268] _An anchor's_] Theobald. _And anchors_ Qq. _And anchors'_
Jennens. _An anchoret's_ Anon, apud Rann conj.

_cheer_] _chair_ Steevens conj.

[1269] _once ... wife_] (Q₁) Ff. _once I be a widdow, ever I be a wife_
Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₆ (_bee_ Q₄. _widow_ Q₆). _once I be a widdow, ever I be
wife_ Q₅. _once I widow be, and then a wife_ Q (1676). _once I be a
widow, 'ere a wife_ Anon. MS.

[1270] Ham. _If ... now!_] Ham. _If ... now._ Qq (in the margin) Ff.
Ham. _If ... now--_ Pope. Ham. [to Oph.] _If ... now,--_ Capell.

_it now_] _her vow_ Elze (Collier MS.)

[1271] _'Tis ... awhile;_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_here_] _heare_ Q₄ Q₅ F₂.

[1272] [Sleeps.] Ff (after _brain_). om. Qq. Lays him down. Capell.

[1273] _betw 'en_] _betwixt_ Q₄ Q₅.

[Exit.] Ff. Exeunt. Qq. Exit Lady. (Q₁). Exit Dutchess. Duke sleeps.
Capell.

[1274] _this_] _the_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[1275] _doth protest_] Qq. _protests_ Ff.

[1276] _i' the world_] om. Q (1676).

[1277] _how?_] Ff Q₆. _how_ Q₂Q₃Q₄Q₅.

[1278] _Gonzago_] _Gonzaga_ Johnson.

[1279] _wife_] _wife's_ Theobald.

[1280] _o'_] Ff. _a_ (Q₁). _of_ Qq.

[1281] _that have_] _shall have_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

_us not_] _not us_ Q (1676).

[1282] _wince_] (Q₁) Steevens. _winch_ Qq Ff.

_unwrung_] Q₄ Q₅ Q₆ F₃ F₄ _unwrong_ Q₂ Q₃. _unrung_ F₁F₂.

[1283] Enter Lucianus.] Ff. After _king_, line 233, in Qq.

[1284] _king_] _duke_ Pope, ed. 2 (Theobald).

[1285] _as good as a_] (Q₁) Qq. _a good_ Ff.

[1286] _my_] Ff. _mine_ Qq.

[1287] _better,_] _worse_ Q (1676 and Rowe).

[1288] _must take your husbands._] Pope. _must take your husband_ (Q₁).
_mistake your husbands_ Qq. _mistake husbands_ Ff. _most of you take
husbands_ Hanmer. _must take husbands_ Long MS.

[1289] _murderer_] _murther_ Ff.

[1290] _pox_,] Ff. om. Qq. _a poxe_ (Q₁.)

[1291] _the ... revenge._] Printed as a quotation in two half lines,
the first ending _raven,_ by Steevens (1793).

[1292] _Thoughts ... agreeing;_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[1293] _Confederate_](Q₁) Ff. _Considerat_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _Considerate_ Q₅
Q₆.

_else_] _and_ Q (1676) and Theobald.

[1294] _ban_] _bane_ (Q₁) Q₆ F₄.

_infected_] _invected_ Q₂ Q₃.

[1295] _Thy_] _The_ F₄. _Thou_ Pope.

[1296] _usurp_] F₃ F₄. _usurpe_ F₁ F₂. _usurps_ (Q₁) Qq.

[Pours ... ear.] Capell, substantially. Powres the poyson in his eares.
Ff. Omitted in Qq.

[1297] _He_] (Q₁) Ff. _A_ Qq.

_for his_] (Q₁) Qq. _for's_ F₁ F₃ F₄. _fors_ F₂

[1298] _name's_] F₁ Q₆. _names_ The rest.

_written in very_] Qq. _writ in_ Ff.

[1299] Ham. _What, ... fire_] Ff. Ham. _Frighted ... fires_ (Q₁).
Omitted in Qq.

[1300] Pol.] Qq. All. Ff. [Exeunt ...] Exeunt all but Ham. & Horatio.
Qq. Exeunt. Manet Hamlet & Horatio. Ff (Manent F₄).

[1301] SCENE VIII. Pope. SCENE VII. Warburton.

_stricken_] (Q₁) Hanmer. _strooken_ Q₂ Q₃. _stroken_ Q₄ Q₅. _strucken_
Ff Q₆.

[1302] _hart_] _heart_ F₂ F₃.

[1303] _while_] _whilst_ Q₄ Q₅. _whilest_ Q₆.

_sleep:_] _sleepe?_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[1304] _Thus_] (Q₁) Qq. _So_ Ff.

[1305] _two_] Ff. om. Qq.

_Provincial_] _Provencial_ Capell (Warton conj.) _Provençal_ Warton
conj.

[1306] _razed_] _raz'd_ Qq. _rac'd_ Ff. _rack'd_ Rowe (ed. 2). _rayed_
Pope. _rais'd_ Jennens (Theobald conj.)

_cry_] _city_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

_players_] _player_ Q₅.

[1307] _sir_] Ff. om. Qq.

[1308] _A whole one, I._] _Ay, a whole one._ Hanmer. _A whole
one;--ay--_ Malone conj. _A whole one, ay,_ Grant White.

[1309] _This ... himself_] Arranged as in Qq. One line in Ff.

[1310] _pajock_] F₃ F₄. _paiock_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _paiocke_ F₁ Q₆.
_pajocke_ F₂. _paicock_ Q (1676). _pecock_ Q (1695). _peacock_ Pope.
_paddock_ Theobald. _puttock_ or _meacock_ Id. conj. (withdrawn).
_baiocco_ Anon. conj. (1814). _hedjocke_ (i.e. _hedgehog_) S. Evans
conj. _padge-hawk_ Id. conj. (withdrawn). _patokie_ (i.e. _pataicco_ or
_pataikoi_) E. Warwick conj. _Polack_ Anon. conj. [hiccups. (as a stage
direction) Leo conj.

[1311] _pound_] _pounds_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[1312] _poisoning?_] _poysoning?_ Ff. _poysning._ Q₂ Q₃. _poysoning._
Q₄. _poisoning._ Q₅ Q₆.

[1313] _Ah, ha!_] _Ah ha,_ Qq. _Oh, ha?_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _Oh ha!_ F₄.

[1314] _like_] _likes_ Q₆.

[1315] Re-enter....] Dyce. Enter.... Qq. Enter.... Ff. (after line 278).

[1316] _vouchsafe_] Ff Q₆. _voutsafe_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.

[1317] _sir,--_] _sir--_ Rowe. _sir._ Qq Ff.

[1318] _him?_] Qq F₁. _him._ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[1319] _rather_] Ff. om. Qq.

[1320] _more richer_] Qq F₁. _more rich_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _richer_ Q (1676).

[1321] _the doctor_] Qq. _his doctor_ F₁. F₂ F₃. _this doctor_ F₄.

_for, for_] Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _for for_ F₁ Q₆ _for_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[1322] _far_] F₄. _farre_ F₁ F₂ F₃. om. Qq.

[1323] _Good ... affair._] Prose in Ff. Two lines, the first ending
_frame,_ in Qq.

[1324] _start_] Ff. _stare_ Qq.

_from_] _upon_ Q₆.

_my_] _the_ Collier MS.

_affair_] _business_ Q (1676).

[1325] [with great ceremony. Capell.

[1326] _of my_] Ff. _of_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _of the_ Q₆.

[1327] Guil.] Guild. Ff. Ros. Qq.

_lord?_] Ff Q₆. _lord._ The rest.

[1328] _wit's_] Q₆ F₄. _wits_ The rest.

[1329] _answer_] Q₅ Q₆. _answere_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _answers_ Ff.

[1330] _as you_] Qq. _you_ Ff.

[1331] _say,--_] _say--_ Rowe. _say._ Qq Ff.

[1332] _struck_] F₄. _strooke_ Qq. _stroke_ F₁ F₂ F₃.

[1333] _so_] _thus_ Q (1676).

_astonish_] Ff Q₆. _stonish_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _'stonish_ Capell.

[1334] _mother's admiration_] _mother admiration_ F₃.
_mother-admiration_ F₄.

_admiration?_] _admiration,_ Q₂ Q₃.

[1335] _Impart._] Qq. om. Ff.

[1336] _So I_] Ff. _And_ Qq.

[1337] _surely ... upon_] Qq. _freely of_ Ff. _surely ... of_ Grant
White.

_bar_] _but bar_ Reed (1803).

[1338] _sir_] Qq. om. Ff.

_grows,--_] _grows--_ Pope. _growes,_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ F₁ F₂ F₃. _grows,_ Q₅
F₄. _growes;_ Q₆.

[1339] Re-enter....] Dyce. Enter the Players with Recorders. Qq (after
line 326). Enter one with a Recorder. Ff.

[1340] _recorders_] Qq. _recorder_ Ff.

_see one. To_] Pope. _see one, to_ Qq. _see, to_ F₁ F₂. _see to_ F₃ F₄.
_set one. To_ Rowe. See note (XVIII).

_To ... you:_] Marked as 'Aside' by Capell.

_you:--_] _you;_ Q₆. _you,_ The rest.

[1341] _love is too unmannerly._] _love is not unmannerly._ Tyrwhitt
conj. _love too unmannerly...._ Keightley.

[1342] Guil.] Ros. Nicholson conj.

[1343] _do_] om. Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

[1344] Guil.] Ros. Staunton conj.

[1345] _It is_] Qq. _'Tis_ Ff.

_ventages_] Qq. _ventiges_ Ff.

[1346] _with ... thumb_] _and the umbo with your fingers_ Becket conj.

_fingers_] Qq. _finger_ Ff.

_and thumb,_] F₄. _and thumbe_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _& the vmber,_ Q₂ Q₃. _and the
thumb_ Q₄ Q₅. _and the thumbe,_ Q₆.

[1347] _eloquent_] Qq. _excellent_ Ff.

[1348] _make_] _would make_ Johnson.

[1349] _the top of_] Ff. om. Qq.

[1350] _speak_] om. Ff.

[1351] _'Sblood_] _s'bloud_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₆. _s'blood_ Q₄ Q₅. _Why_ Ff. om. Q
(1676).

_I_] Qq. _that I_ Ff.

[1352] _can fret me_] (Q₁) Ff. _fret me not_ Qq.

[1353] _yet_] (Q₁) Edd. (Globe ed.) om. Qq Ff.

[1354] Enter Polonius.] As in Capell. After _sir!,_ line 356, in Qq Ff.

[1355] _you_] _your_ F₂.

[1356] _yonder_] Qq. _that_ Ff.

[1357] _cloud ... camel?_] Pointed as in Qq. _cloud?... camell._ F₁ F₂.
_cloud, ... camell._ F₃. _cloud, ... camel?_ F₄.

[1358] _of_] Qq. _like_ Ff.

[1359] _camel ... camel_] _weasel ... weasel_ Capell.

[1360] _By the mass_] _By'th masse_ Qq. _By th' mass_ F₄. _By 'th'
misse_ F₁ F₂. _By th' misse_ F₃.

_'tis like_] Q₄ Q₅ Q₆. _tis, like_ Q₂ Q₃. _it's like_ Ff (_its_ F₂).
_'tis--like_ Jennens.

[1361] _a weasel ... a weasel_] _an ouzle ... an ouzle_ Pope, reading
_black_ in line 363. _a camel ... a camel_ Capell.

[1362] _backed_] _back'd_ Ff. _back't_ (Q₁). _backt_ Q₂ Q₃. _black_ Q₄
Q₅. _blacke_ Q₆. _beck'd_ Tollet conj.

[1363] _whale?_] Ff. _whale._ Qq.

[1364] _I will_] Qq. _will I_ Ff.

[1365] _They fool me_] _They fool me_ [to Hor. Capell.

_They ... bent._] A separate line in Ff.

[1366] See note (XIX).

[1367] [Exit Polonius.] Exit. Ff. om. Qq. After _said,_ line 370, in
Dyce.

[1368] [Exeunt....] Exeunt Ros. and Gui. Horatio, and the Players,
withdraw. Capell. Exe. Rowe. om. Qq Ff.

[1369] _breathes_] Q₆ F₃ F₄. _breaths_ F₁ F₂. _breakes_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄.
_breaks_ Q₅.

[1370] _this_] _the_ Q₆.

[1371] _bitter ... day_] Ff. _busines as the bitter day_ Qq. _business
as day it self_ Q (1676). _business as the better day_ Warburton.
_business as the bitter'st day_ Heath conj. _business as the light of
day_ Cartwright conj.

[1372] _Soft! now_] _soft, now_ Qq. _Soft now,_ Ff.

[1373] _lose_] Q₆. _loose_ The rest.

[1374] _not_] _but not_ Johnson.

[1375] _daggers_] Ff Q₆. _dagger_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.

[1376] _How ... consent!_] Omitted by Pope.

[1377] _soever_] Q₆. _somever_ The rest.

[1378] _never, my soul, consent_] Pointed as by Capell. _never my soule
consent_ Qq Ff.

[Exit.] Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. om. Q₅ Ff Q₆.

[1379] SCENE III.] Capell. SCENE IX. Pope. SCENE VII. Warburton. om. Ff.

A ... castle.] Capell, substantially.

[1380] _range_] _rage_ Pope.

[1381] _estate may_] _estate, may_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[1382] _near us_] _neare us_ Q₆. _neer's_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _dangerous_ Ff.

[1383] _lunacies_] Ff. _browes_ Qq. _lunes_ Theobald. _frows_ Johnson
conj. _braves_ Anon. conj.

_ourselves provide_] _provide our selves_ Pope.

[1384] _To keep ... live_] One line in Rowe, reading _many._

[1385] _many many_] _many_ F₂ F₃ F₄ and Q (1676). _very many_ Collier
(Collier MS.) _many-many_ Staunton.

[1386] _The ... bound_] One line in Qq. Two, the first ending _single,_
in Ff.

[1387] _noyance_] _'noyance_ Hanmer.

[1388] _upon_] _on_ Pope.

_weal_] _weale_ Qq. _spirit_ Ff.

_depends and rests_] _depend and rest_ Hanmer.

[1389] _many. The_] _many: the_ Q₆. _many, the_ The rest.

_cease_] Ff. _cesse_ Qq. _decease_ Pope.

_The cease of_] _Deceasing_ Bailey conj.

[1390] _it is_] _It is_ Ff. _or it is_ Qq. _It's_ Pope.

[1391] _summit_] Rowe. _somnet_ Qq Ff and Q (1676).

[1392] _huge_] _hough_ Q₂ Q₃. _hugh_ Q₄.

[1393] _mortised_] _morteist_ Qq. _mortiz'd_ Ff.

[1394] _ruin_] _ruine_ Ff. _raine_ Qq.

_Never_] _Ne'er_ Pope.

[1395] _with_] Ff. om. Qq.

_groan_] F₃ F₄. _growne_ Q₄ Q₅. _grone_ The rest.

[1396] _voyage_] _viage_ Q₂ Q₃. _voiage_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

[1397] _about_] Qq. _upon_ Ff.

[1398] Ros. Guil.] Steevens (1793). Both. Ff. Ros. Qq.

_haste us_] _make haste_ Q₆.

[Exeunt....] Capell. Exeunt Gent. Qq Ff.

[1399] _warrant_] _warnt_ Q₆.

[1400] _speech, of vantage_] Theobald. _speech of vantage_ Qq Ff.

[1401] _know_] _heare_ Q₆.

[Exit Polonius.] Capell. Exit. Qq Ff (after _know_).

[1402] _upon't_] Ff Q₆. _uppont_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.

[1403] _A_] _That of a_ Theobald.

_murder_] _murderer_ S. Walker conj.

_can I not_] _I cannot_ Q (1676) and Rowe. _alas! I cannot_ Hanmer.
_can I?--No!_ Jackson conj. _that can I not_ Seymour conj.

[1404] _not, ... will:_] Pointed as in Ff. _not, ... will,_ Qq.

[1405] _will_] _'t will_ Hanmer (Anon. ap. Theobald conj.) _th' ill_
Warburton.

[1406] _guilt defeats_] _guilt, defeats_ F₁ F₂ F₃.

[1407] _neglect. What_] _neglect: what_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆. _neglect; what_ Ff.
_neglect, what_ Q₂ Q₃.

[1408] _pardon'd_] Ff. _pardon_ Qq.

[1409] _fault is_] _faults is_ Q₄ Q₅.

[1410] _murder?_] _murther?_ Q₆. _murther,_ Q₂ Q₃. _murther:_ Q₄ Q₅ F₁
F₂ F₃. _mother:_ F₄. _murther!_ Pope.

[1411] _effects_] _affects_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

[1412] _pardon'd_] _pardoned_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

_offence_] _effects_ Warburton.

[1413] _corrupted currents_] Q₂ Q₃ Q₅ Q₆. _conrupted currents_ Q₄.
_corrupted currants_ Ff. _corrupt occurrents_ Anon. conj. MS. and Misc.
Obs. on Hamlet, 1752. _corrupted 'currents_ Dyce, ed. 2 (S. Walker
conj.)

_currents of this world_] _courts of this bad world_ Long MS.

[1414] _gilded_] F₁ F₄. _guilded_ Q₂ Q₃ F₂ F₃. _guided_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

_shove_] Ff. _showe_ Q₂ Q₃. _show_ Q₄ Q₅. _shew_ Q₆.

[1415] _prize_] _purse_ Collier (Collier MS.)

[1416] _his_] _it's_ Long MS.

_and_] om. Pope.

[1417] _it_] _aught_ Hanmer.

_can not_] _can but_ Warburton.

[1418] _angels_] _angles_ Q₄ Q₅.

[1419] _heart_] _hearts_ Q₆.

_steel_] _steale_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄.

[1420] [Retires....] Malone. hee kneeles. (Q₁). The King kneels. Rowe.
Remains in Action of Prayer. Capell. om. Qq Ff.

[1421] SCENE X. Pope. SCENE IX. Warburton.

_it pat, now he is_] Ff. _it, but now a is_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₅ Q₆. _it, bot now a
is_ Q₄.

_praying_] _a praying_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.

[1422] _so he goes_] Ff. _so a goes_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₅ Q₆. _so goes_ Q₄.

[1423] _revenged._] _revendge,_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _revenged,_ Q₅. _reveng'd:_
F₁ F₂ F₃. _reveng'd?_ Q₆. _revenged:_ F₄.

[1424] _sole_] Qq. _foule_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _foul_ F₄. _fal'n_ Warburton.
_fool_ Heath and Capell conj.

[1425] _To heaven_] A separate line in Qq. Joined to line 79 in Ff.

[1426] _O,_] _Oh_ Ff. _Why_ Qq.

_hire and salary_] _hire and salery_ Ff. _base and silly_ Qq. _a
reward_ Q (1676). _reward_ Q (1703).

[1427] _He_] Ff. _A_ Qq.

_bread_] _blood_ Mason conj.

[1428] _as flush_] Qq. _as fresh_ Ff. _and flush_ Warburton.

[1429] _and_] om. Pope.

[1430] _season'd_] _seasoned_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

[1431] _No._] A separate line in Qq. Ends line 86 in Ff. Omitted by
Pope.

[1432] _hent_] _bent_ F₄. _time_ Q (1676) and Rowe. _hest_ Warburton
conj. (withdrawn). _hint_ Capell (Theobald conj.)

[1433] _drunk asleep_] Pointed as in Ff. _drunke, asleep_ Qq.
_drunk-asleep_ Johnson.

[1434] _incestuous_] _incestious_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.

_pleasure_] _pleasures_ Q (1676) and Capell.

[1435] _game, a-swearing_] _game a swearing_ Q₂ Q₃. _game swaring_
(Q₁). _game, a swearing_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆. _gaming, swearing_ Ff.

[1436] _heels may_] _heele mas_ Q₄ Q₅. _heele may_ Q₆.

[1437] [Rising] Rises. Capell. The King rises, and comes forward.
Theobald om. Qq Ff.

[1438] SCENE IV.] Capell. SCENE II. Rowe. SCENE XI. Pope. SCENE X.
Warburton.

The Queen's closet.] Steevens. The Queen's Apartment. Rowe.

Enter Queen....] Ff. Enter Gertrard.... Qq.

[1439] _He_] Ff. _A_ Qq.

_He.... him:_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[1440] _bear_] _berre_ F₂.

[1441] _screen'd_] _scree'nd_ F₂ F₃.

[1442] _sconce me even_] Hanmer. _silence me even_ Qq. _silence me
e'ene_ F₁. _silence me e'ne_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _'sconce me e'en_ Warburton.
_silence me in_ Long MS. See note (XX).

[1443] _with him_] Ff. om. Qq.

Ham ... _mother!_] Ff. Omitted in Qq.

[1444] Queen.] Qu., Que. or Queen. Ff. Ger. Qq (and throughout the
scene, except line 51).

[1445] _I'll ... coming._] Prose by Edd. Two lines, the first ending
_not_, in Qq Ff.

[1446] _warrant_] Ff Q₆. _wait_ Q₂ Q₃. _waite_ Q₄ Q₅.

_not. Withdraw_] _not: you withdraw_ Hanmer, ending the previous line
_warrant you._

[1447] [Polonius hides....] Polonius hides himself.... Rowe. om. Qq Ff.

Enter Hamlet.] Ff. After _round_, line 5, in Qq. Enter Hamlet,
abruptly. Capell.

[1448] _a wicked_] Qq. _an idle_ Ff.

[1449] _What's the matter now?_] Continued to Queen, S. Walker conj.

[1450] _And--would ... so!--you_] _Pointed as in_ Pope, substantially.
_And would it were not so, you_ Qq. _But would you were not so. You_
Ff. _But 'would it were not so!--You_ Theobald conj. (withdrawn).

[1451] _set_] _send_ Collier MS.

[1452] _budge_] Q₆ F₃ F₄. _boudge_ The rest.

[1453] _go not_] _go not hence_ Long MS. reading with F₂.

_set you up_] _set up_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[1454] _glass Where ... you._] _glasse. Where ... you?_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[1455] _inmost_] Ff. _most_ Qq. _utmost_ Q (1676).

[1456] _Help, help, ho!_] _Helpe, helpe, hoa._ F₁ F₂. _Help, help,
hoa._ F₃ F₄. _Helpe how._ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _Helpe hoe._ Q₅. _Helpe ho._ Q₆.

[1457] _Help, ... rat?_] As one line in Capell, reading _What, ho!
help!_

[1458] [Behind] Capell. Behind the arras. Rowe. on. Ff.

_What, ho!... help!_] Ff. _What how helpe._ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _What hoe helpe._
Q₅ Q₆.

[1459] [Drawing] Draws. Malone, after _rat?_ om. Qq Ff.

[Makes ... arras.] Capell, substantially. om. Qq Ff.

[1460] [Behind] Capell. om. Qq Ff.

[Falls and dies.] Falls forward, and dies. Capell. Killes Polonius. Ff.
om. Qq.

_what hast_] _hast_ F₃.

[1461] _Nay ... king?_] As in Qq Ff. Capell ends line 25 at _know not._

[1462] _is_] _was_ Q (1676).

[1463] _kill_] Qq F₁. _killd_ F₂. _kill'd_ F₃ F₄.

_king!_] _king?_ Ff Q₆. _king._ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.

_'twas_] F₁ F₃ F₄. _twas_ F₂. _it was_ Qq.

[Lifts ... discovers....] Lifts ... sees.... Dyce. Lifts up the arras,
and draws forth Polonius. Capell (after line 26). om. Qq Ff.

[1464] [To Polonius. Pope.

[1465] _better_] Qq. _betters_ Ff.

[1466] _brass'd_] _brasd_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _bras'd_ Ff Q₆.

[1467] _be_] Qq. _is_ Ff.

_sense_] _thy sense_ Q (1703).

[1468] _hypocrite_] _hippocrit_ Q₂ Q₃. _hipocrit_ Q₄.

_off_] Ff Q₆. _of_ The rest.

[1469] _sets_] Qq. _makes_ Ff.

[1470] _rhapsody_] F₄. _rapsedy_ Q₂ Q₃. _rapsody_ Q₄ F₂ F₃. _rapsodie_
Q₅ Q₆. _rapsidie_ F₁.

_doth_] Ff. _dooes_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _does_ Q₅ Q₆.

[1471] _glow; Yea,_] _glow, Yea_ Ff. _glowe Ore_ Q₂ Q₃. _glow Ore_ Q₄
Q₅. _glow Yea_ Q₆. _glow; Yet_ Smyth conj. MS.

[1472] _solidity_] _solidiry_ Q₄ Q₅.

[1473] _tristful_] F₄. _tristfull_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _heated_ Qq.

_as against_] _and, as 'gainst_ Warburton, reading _O'er_ in line 49.

[1474] _act._] _act. Ah me, that act!_ Q (1676).

[1475] _Ay ... index?_] Prose in Ff. See note (XXI).

[1476] _was_] om. F₂ F₃ F₄.

_this_] Q₂ Q₃. _his_ The rest.

[1477] _and_] Qq. _or_ Ff.

[1478] _New-lighted_] _New lighted_ Qq F₁. _Now lighted_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

_a heaven-kissing_] Ff Q₆ (Ingleby's copy). _a heaue, a kissing_ Q₂ Q₃
Q₄ Q₅ Q₆ (Capell's copy).

[1479] _and a_] _and_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

[1480] _mildew'd_] Ff Q₆. _mildewed_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _mil-dewed_ Q₅.

_ear_] _eare_ Qq F₁. _deare_ F₂. _deer_ F₃ F₄.

[1481] _brother_] Qq. _breath_ Ff.

[1482] _batten_] _batter_ Q (1676).

[1483] _in the_] _of the_ Q (1676).

_it's_] _its_ F₂.

[1484] _step_] _stoop_ Collier (Collier MS. and Anon. MS.) See note
(XXII).

[1485] _Sense ... difference._] Qq. Omitted in Ff.

[1486] _motion_] _notion_ Warburton.

[1487] _cozen'd_] F₃ F₄. _cosund_ Q₂ Q₃. _cosond_ Q₄ Q₅. _cousend_ F₁
F₂. _couzen'd_ Q₆.

_hoodman_] Ff. _hodman_ Qq. _hobman_ (Q₁).

_hoodman-blind_] Hyphen omitted in Q₂ Q₃.

[1488] _Eyes ... mope._] Qq. Omitted in Ff.

[1489] _Could ... blush?_] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

[1490] _hell_] _heat_ Hanmer.

[1491] _mutine_] _mutiny_ Q (1676) and Rowe.

[1492] _ardour_] Pope. _ardure_ Qq Ff.

[1493] _And_] Qq. _As_ Ff.

_panders_] Ff. _pardons_ Qq. _guerdons_ Anon. conj. MS.

[1494] _eyes into my very_] Ff. _very eyes into my_ Qq.

[1495] _grained_] Ff. _greeued_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _grieued_ Q₅. _grieved_ Q₆.

[1496] _not leave_] Ff. _leave there_ Qq.

[1497] _enseamed_] Ff. _inseemed_ Q₂ Q₃. _incestuous_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

[1498] _sty,--_] _sty;--_ Theobald. _stie._ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _stye._ F₁ F₂
Q₆ F₃. _sty._ F₄.

_to me_] om. Pope.

_me no_] Qq. _me, no_ Ff.

[1499] _in_] _into_ Q (1676).

_my_] Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _mine_ Ff Q₆.

[1500] _that is not_] _that's not the_ Q (1676). _that is not a_
Keightley.

_tithe_] _tythe_ Ff. _kyth_ Qq.

[1501] _the rule,_] _a rogue_ Anon. apud Rann conj.

[1502] _pocket!_] _pocket, a--_ Seymour conj.

Queen. _No more!_] Omitted in Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

_No_] _Oh! no_ Hanmer.

[1503] _patches--_] Rowe. _patches,_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _patches._ Ff Q₆.
_patches, all unseemly._ Seymour conj.

Enter Ghost.] As in Dyce. Before line 102 in Qq Ff. Enter the Ghost in
his night gowne. (Q₁). Enter Ghost unarmed. Collier MS.

[1504] [Starting up. Rowe.

[1505] _your_] Qq. _you_ Ff. _you,_ Knight.

[1506] Queen. _Alas, he's mad!_] om. (Q₁) and Seymour conj.

_he's_] _hee's_ Qq. _hes_ F₂.

[1507] _time_] _fume_ Collier MS.

[1508] _O, say!_] As in Theobald. At the end of the previous line in Qq
Ff.

[1509] _fighting_] _sighting_ Q₄. _sighing_ Q₅ Q₆.

[1510] _you do_] _you doe_ Qq. _you_ F₁. _thus you_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[1511] _the incorporal_] _th' incorporall_ Qq. _their corporall_ F₁.
_the corporall_ F₂ F₃. _th' incorporeal_ Q (1676). _the corporal_ F₄.

[1512] _bedded_] Q₂ Q₃ Ff. _beaded_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆. om. Q (1676).

_hairs_] Rowe. _haire_ Qq F₁ F₂. _hair_ F₃ F₄.

_like ... excrements_] om. Q (1676).

[1513] _Start ... stand_] Q₂ Q₃ Ff. _Starts ... stands_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

_an end_] Qq Ff. _on end_ Q (1676) and Pope (ed. 2).

[1514] _glares_] _gleres_ Q₅ Q₆.

[1515] _conjoin'd_] _conioyned_ Q₄ Q₅.

[1516] _upon_] _on_ Pope.

[1517] _effects_] _affects_ Singer.

_I have_] _have I_ F₃ F₄.

[1518] _whom_] _who_ F₁.

[Pointing to the Ghost. Rowe.

[1519] _that is_] _that's here_ Q (1676).

_is_] _is there_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

[1520] _steals_] _stalks_ Anon. conj. MS. and Misc. Obs. on Hamlet,
1752.

[1521] _father, in his habit as_] _father--in his habit--as_ Steevens
conj.

_lived_] _lives_ Q₄.

[1522] [Exit Ghost.] Qq. Exit. Ff.

[1523] _This ... in._] As in Pope. One line in Qq Ff.

[1524] _Ecstasy!_] _Extasie?_ Ff. om. Qq. _What ecstasie?_ Pope. _How!
ecstasy!_ Seymour conj.

[1525] _utter'd_] _uttred_ Qq. _uttered_ Ff.

[1526] _And I the_] Ff Q₆. _And the_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.

_re-word_] _re-ward_ Q (1703).

[1527] _Would gambol from. Mother,_] _Cannot do mother,_ Q (1676).

[1528] _that_] Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. a Ff. _this_ Q₆.

[1529] _Whiles_] Qq. _Whilst_ Ff.

_mining_] _running_ F₃ F₄.

[1530] _what is_] _what else_ Seymour conj.

[1531] _on_] Qq. _or_ Ff. _o'er_ Knight.

[1532] _ranker_] Q₅ Q₆. _rancker_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _ranke_ F₁ F₂. _rank_ F₃ F₄.

[1533] _Forgive ... good._] Marked as 'aside' by Staunton.

[1534] _me_] om. Pope.

[1535] _these_] _this_ F₁.

[1536] _curb_] F₄. _curbe_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅ F₃. _courb_ F₁ Q₆. _courbe_ F₂.

_him_] _it_ Pope.

[1537] _O Hamlet_] As in Qq. A separate line in Ff.

_in twain_] om. Q (1676).

[1538] _O_] _Then_ Q (1676).

[1539] _live_] Ff. _leave_ Qq.

[1540] _my_] Qq. _mine_ Ff.

[1541] _That ... put on._] Qq. Omitted in Ff.

[1542] _eat, Of habits devil,_] _eat, Of habits divell,_ Q₆. _eate Of
habits deuill,_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _eat Of habit's devil,_ Rowe. _eat, Of
habit's devil,_ Pope. _eat Of habits evil,_ Theobald (Thirlby conj.)
_eat Of habit's evil,_ Grant White (Theobald conj. withdrawn). _eat
Of habits, devil,_ Johnson. _eat, Or habit's devil,_ Steevens conj.
_eat, If habit's devil,_ Becket conj. _ape, Oft habits devil,,_ or _ape
Of devils' habits_ or _ape, Of habits evil_ Jackson conj. _eat, Oft
habits' devil,_ Staunton. _create Of habits, devil_ Keightley. _eat,--O
shapeless devil!--_ Bullock conj.

[1543] _on. Refrain to-night_] _on: refrain to night_ Q₆. _on to
refraine night_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.

_Refrain to-night_] Put at the end of line 160 in Ff.

[1544] _the next more ... potency._] Qq. Omitted in Ff.

[1545] _almost can_] _can almost_ Rowe.

[1546] _And either ... the_] _And either the_ Q₂ Q₃. _And Maister the_
Q₄. _And master the_ Q₅ Q₆. _And master ev'n the_ Pope. _And master
even the_ Capell. _And either curb the_ Malone. _And either quell the_
Singer (ed. 1). _And either mate the_ Anon. conj. _And wither up the_
Bullock conj. _And either lay the_ Cartwright conj.

_And either house_ Bailey conj.

[1547] [Pointing to Polonius.] Rowe. om. Qq Ff.

[1548] _heaven hath_] _the heavens have_ Hanmer.

[1549] _me ... me_] _him with me, and me with this_ Hanmer. _this with
me, and me with this_ Johnson.

[1550] _I ... behind._] Aside. Delius conj.

[1551] _Thus_] Ff Q₆. _This_ The rest.

[1552] _One ... lady._] Qq. Omitted in Ff. _Hark, one ... lady._
Capell. _But one ... lady._ Steevens (1793). _One ... good my lady._
Keightley.

[1553] _the bloat_] Warburton. _the blowt_ Qq. _the blunt_ Ff. _not
the_ Q (1676). _the fond_ Pope.

_again to bed_] _to bed again_ Q (1676).

[1554] _to ravel_ Q (1676) _and_ F₄. _to ravell_ F₁ F₂ Q₆ F₃. _rouell_
Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.

[1555] _gib_] Qq. _gibbe_ Ff. _gib-cat_ Keightley.

[1556] _concernings_] _conceruings_ Q₄. _conseruings_ Q₅.

[1557] _conclusions, in the basket_] F₃ F₄. _conclusions in the basket_
Qq. _conclusions in the basket,_ F₁. _conclusions, in the basket,_ F₂.

[1558] _breathe_] F₃ Q₆ F₄. _breath_ The rest.

[1559] _that?_] Ff. _that._ Q₂ Q₃ Q₆. _that,_ Q₄ Q₅.

_Alack,_] om. Seymour conj., ending lines 196-199, _assured ...
life ... said ... that?_

[1560] _Alack ... on._] As in Capell. Two lines, the first ending
_forgot,_ in Qq. One line in Ff.

[1561] _on_] om. Hanmer.

[1562] _There's ... meet._] Qq. Omitted in Ff.

[1563] _knavery_] _naiveté_ or _naiverie_ Becket conj.

[1564] _the sport_] _true sport_ Anon. conj.

_enginer_] Qq. _engineer_ Q (1676) and Pope.

[1565] _petar_] Qq. _petard_ Johnson.

_and't_] Theobald. _an't_ Qq. _and it_ Steevens.

[1566] _meet._] Q₆. _meete,_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _meet,_ Q₅.

[1567] _shall_] _will_ Q (1676).

_packing:_] _packing: I'll pack him:_ Anon. conj.

[1568] _good night. Indeed_] Pointed as in Ff. _good night indeed,_ Qq.

[1569] _in life_] _in's life_ Q₆.

_foolish_] (Q₁) Ff. _most foolish_ Qq.

_foolish prating_] _foolish-prating_ S. Walker conj.

[1570] [Exeunt....] Malone, after Capell. Exit. Qq. Exit Hamlet with
the dead body. (Q₁). Exit Hamlet tugging in Polonius. Ff.




ACT IV.


SCENE I. _A room in the castle._

      _Enter_ KING, QUEEN, ROSENCRANTZ, _and_ GUILDENSTERN.[1571]

    _King._  There's matter in these sighs, these profound heaves:[1572]
    You must translate: 'tis fit we understand them.
    Where is your son?

    _Queen._ Bestow this place on us a little while.

                           [_Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern._[1573]

    Ah, mine own lord, what have I seen to-night![1574]                5

    _King._  What, Gertrude? How does Hamlet?[1575]

    _Queen._  Mad as the sea and wind, when both contend[1576]
    Which is the mightier: in his lawless fit,[1577]
    Behind the arras hearing something stir,
    Whips out his rapier, cries 'a rat, a rat!'[1578]                 10
    And in this brainish apprehension kills[1579]
    The unseen good old man.

    _King._                  O heavy deed!
    It had been so with us, had we been there:[1580]
    His liberty is full of threats to all,
    To you yourself, to us, to every one.                             15
    Alas, how shall this bloody deed be answer'd?[1581]
    It will be laid to us, whose providence
    Should have kept short, restrain'd and out of haunt,[1582]
    This mad young man: but so much was our love,
    We would not understand what was most fit,                        20
    But, like the owner of a foul disease,
    To keep it from divulging, let it feed[1583]
    Even on the pith of life. Where is he gone?

    _Queen._  To draw apart the body he hath kill'd:
    O'er whom his very madness, like some ore[1584]                   25
    Among a mineral of metals base,[1585]
    Shows itself pure; he weeps for what is done.[1586]

    _King._ O Gertrude, come away![1587]
    The sun no sooner shall the mountains touch,
    But we will ship him hence: and this vile deed[1588]              30
    We must, with all our majesty and skill,
    Both countenance and excuse. Ho, Guildenstern!

            _Re-enter_ ROSENCRANTZ _and_ GUILDENSTERN.[1589]

    Friends both, go join you with some further aid:[1590]
    Hamlet in madness hath Polonius slain,
    And from his mother's closet hath he dragg'd him:[1591]           35
    Go seek him out; speak fair, and bring the body
    Into the chapel. I pray you, haste in this.

                           [_Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern._[1592]

    Come, Gertrude, we'll call up our wisest friends;
    And let them know, both what we mean to do,[1593]
    And what's untimely done....[1594]                                40
    Whose whisper o'er the world's diameter[1594]
    As level as the cannon to his blank[1594]
    Transports his poison'd shot, may miss our name[1594][1595]
    And hit the woundless air. O, come away![1594]
    My soul is full of discord and dismay.                [_Exeunt._  45


SCENE II. _Another room in the castle._

                         _Enter_ HAMLET.[1596]

    _Ham._ Safely stowed.

    _Ros._ } [_Within_] Hamlet! Lord Hamlet![1597]
    _Guil._}

    _Ham._ But soft, what noise? who calls on Hamlet?[1598]
    O, here they come.

             _Enter_ ROSENCRANTZ _and_ GUILDENSTERN.[1599]

    _Ros._ What have you done, my lord, with the dead body?            5

    _Ham._ Compounded it with dust, whereto 'tis kin.[1600]

    _Ros._ Tell us where 'tis, that we may take it thence
    And bear it to the chapel.

    _Ham._ Do not believe it.

    _Ros._ Believe what?                                              10

    _Ham._ That I can keep your counsel and not mine
    own. Besides, to be demanded of a sponge! what replication[1601]
    should be made by the son of a king?

    _Ros._ Take you me for a sponge, my lord?

    _Ham._ Ay, sir; that soaks up the king's countenance,             15
    his rewards, his authorities. But such officers do the king
    best service in the end: he keeps them, like an ape, in the[1602]
    corner of his jaw; first mouthed, to be last swallowed:
    when he needs what you have gleaned, it is but squeezing
    you, and, sponge, you shall be dry again.                         20

    _Ros._ I understand you not, my lord.

    _Ham._ I am glad of it: a knavish speech sleeps in a
    foolish ear.

    _Ros._ My lord, you must tell us where the body is, and
    go with us to the king.                                           25

    _Ham._ The body is with the king, but the king is not[1603]
    with the body. The king is a thing--[1604]

    _Guil._ A thing, my lord?[1605]

    _Ham._ Of nothing: bring me to him. Hide fox, and[1606][1607]
    all after.                                      [_Exeunt._[1607]  30


SCENE III. _Another room in the castle._

                    _Enter_ KING, _attended_.[1608]

    _King._  I have sent to seek him, and to find the body.[1609]
    How dangerous is it that this man goes loose!
    Yet must not we put the strong law on him:[1610]
    He's loved of the distracted multitude,
    Who like not in their judgement, but their eyes;                   5
    And where 'tis so, the offender's scourge is weigh'd,[1611]
    But never the offence. To bear all smooth and even,[1612]
    This sudden sending him away must seem
    Deliberate pause: diseases desperate grown
    By desperate appliance are relieved,                              10
    Or not at all.

                       _Enter_ ROSENCRANTZ.[1613]

                   How now! what hath befall'n?

    _Ros._ Where the dead body is bestow'd, my lord,
    We cannot get from him.

    _King._                 But where is he?

    _Ros._ Without, my lord; guarded, to know your pleasure.

    _King._ Bring him before us.                                      15

    _Ros._ Ho, Guildenstern! bring in my lord.

                _Enter_ HAMLET _and_ GUILDENSTERN.[1614]

    _King._ Now, Hamlet, where's Polonius?

    _Ham._ At supper.

    _King._ At supper! where?

    _Ham._ Not where he eats, but where he is eaten: a[1615]          20
    certain convocation of politic worms are e'en at him. Your[1616]
    worm is your only emperor for diet: we fat all creatures
    else to fat us, and we fat ourselves for maggots: your fat[1617]
    king and your lean beggar is but variable service, two[1618]
    dishes, but to one table: that's the end.[1619]                   25

    _King._ Alas, alas![1620]

    _Ham._ A man may fish with the worm that hath eat of[1620]
    a king, and eat of the fish that hath fed of that worm.[1620][1621]

    _King._ What dost thou mean by this?

    _Ham._ Nothing but to show you how a king may go a                30
    progress through the guts of a beggar.[1622]

    _King._ Where is Polonius?

    _Ham._ In heaven; send thither to see: if your messenger
    find him not there, seek him i' the other place yourself.
    But indeed, if you find him not within this month, you[1623]      35
    shall nose him as you go up the stairs into the lobby.

    _King._ Go seek him there.              [_To some Attendants._[1624]

    _Ham._ He will stay till you come.       [_Exeunt Attendants._[1625]

    _King._ Hamlet, this deed, for thine especial safety,[1626]
    Which we do tender, as we dearly grieve                           40
    For that which thou hast done, must send thee hence
    With fiery quickness: therefore prepare thyself;[1627]
    The bark is ready and the wind at help,[1628]
    The associates tend, and every thing is bent[1629]
    For England.

    _Ham._       For England?

    _King._                   Ay, Hamlet.

    _Ham._                                Good.[1630]                 45

    _King._ So is it, if thou knew'st our purposes.

    _Ham._ I see a cherub that sees them. But, come; for[1631]
    England! Farewell, dear mother.

    _King._ Thy loving father, Hamlet.

    _Ham._ My mother: father and mother is man and                    50
    wife; man and wife is one flesh, and so, my mother.[1632]
    Come, for England!                                          [_Exit._

    _King._ Follow him at foot; tempt him with speed aboard;[1633]
    Delay it not; I'll have him hence to-night:
    Away! for every thing is seal'd and done                          55
    That else leans on the affair: pray you, make haste.[1634]

                                 [_Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern._

    And, England, if my love thou hold'st at aught--
    As my great power thereof may give thee sense,
    Since yet thy cicatrice looks raw and red
    After the Danish sword, and thy free awe                          60
    Pays homage to us--thou mayst not coldly set[1635]
    Our sovereign process; which imports at full,
    By letters congruing to that effect,[1636]
    The present death of Hamlet. Do it, England;
    For like the hectic in my blood he rages,                         65
    And thou must cure me: till I know 'tis done,
    Howe'er my haps, my joys were ne'er begun.            [_Exit._[1637]


SCENE IV. _A plain in Denmark._

   _Enter_ FORTINBRAS, _a_ Captain _and_ Soldiers, _marching_.[1638]

    _For._ Go, captain, from me greet the Danish king;[1639]
    Tell him that by his license Fortinbras
    Craves the conveyance of a promised march[1640]
    Over his kingdom. You know the rendezvous.[1641]
    If that his majesty would aught with us,                           5
    We shall express our duty in his eye;[1642]
    And let him know so.

    _Cap._               I will do't, my lord.

    _For._ Go softly on.[1643]

                               [_Exeunt Fortinbras and Soldiers._[1643]

 _Enter_ HAMLET, ROSENCRANTZ, GUILDENSTERN, _and others_.[1643][1644]

    _Ham._ Good sir, whose powers are these?[1643][1645]

    _Cap._ They are of Norway, sir.[1643][1645][1646]                 10

    _Ham._ How purposed, sir, I pray you?[1643][1645][1647]

    _Cap._ Against some part of Poland.[1643][1645][1648]

    _Ham._ Who commands them, sir?[1643][1645]

    _Cap._ The nephew to old Norway, Fortinbras.[1645][1649]

    _Ham._ Goes it against the main of Poland, sir,[1645]             15
    Or for some frontier?[1645]

    _Cap._ Truly to speak, and with no addition,[1645][1650]
    We go to gain a little patch of ground[1645]
    That hath in it no profit but the name.[1645]
    To pay five ducats, five, I would not farm it;[1645][1651]        20
    Nor will it yield to Norway or the Pole[1645]
    A ranker rate, should it be sold in fee.[1645][1652]

    _Ham._ Why, then the Polack never will defend it.[1645]

    _Cap._ Yes, it is already garrison'd.[1645][1653]

    _Ham._ Two thousand souls and twenty thousand ducats[1645][1654][1655]  25
    Will not debate the question of this straw:[1645][1655]
    This is the imposthume of much wealth and peace,[1645]
    That inward breaks, and shows no cause without[1645]
    Why the man dies. I humbly thank you, sir.[1645]

    _Cap._ God be wi' you, sir.                           [_Exit._[1645]

    _Ros._                Will't please you go, my lord?[1645][1656]  30

    _Ham._ I'll be with you straight. Go a little before.[1645]

                                  [_Exeunt all but Hamlet._[1645][1657]

    How all occasions do inform against me,[1645]
    And spur my dull revenge! What is a man,[1645]
    If his chief good and market of his time[1645]
    Be but to sleep and feed? a beast, no more.[1645]                 35
    Sure, he that made us with such large discourse,[1645]
    Looking before and after, gave us not[1645]
    That capability and god-like reason[1645]
    To fust in us unused. Now, whether it be[1645][1658]
    Bestial oblivion, or some craven scruple[1645]                    40
    Of thinking too precisely on the event,--[1645]
    A thought which, quarter'd, hath but one part wisdom[1645]
    And ever three parts coward,--I do not know[1645][1659]
    Why yet I live to say 'this thing's to do,'[1645][1659]
    Sith I have cause, and will, and strength, and means,[1645]       45
    To do't. Examples gross as earth exhort me:[1645]
    Witness this army, of such mass and charge,[1645]
    Led by a delicate and tender prince,[1645]
    Whose spirit with divine ambition puff'd[1645]
    Makes mouths at the invisible event,[1645]                        50
    Exposing what is mortal and unsure[1645]
    To all that fortune, death and danger dare,[1645]
    Even for an egg-shell. Rightly to be great[1645][1660]
    Is not to stir without great argument,[1645][1660][1661]
    But greatly to find quarrel in a straw[1645]                      55
    When honour's at the stake. How stand I then,[1645]
    That have a father kill'd, a mother stain'd,[1645]
    Excitements of my reason and my blood,[1645]
    And let all sleep, while to my shame I see[1645]
    The imminent death of twenty thousand men,[1645][1662]            60
    That for a fantasy and trick of fame[1645]
    Go to their graves like beds, fight for a plot[1645][1663]
    Whereon the numbers cannot try the cause,[1645]
    Which is not tomb enough and continent[1645]
    To hide the slain? O, from this time forth,[1645][1664]           65
    My thoughts be bloody, or be nothing worth!           [_Exit._[1645]


SCENE V. _Elsinore. A room in the castle._

            _Enter_ QUEEN, HORATIO, _and a_ Gentleman.[1665]

    _Queen._ I will not speak with her.

    _Gent._ She is importunate, indeed distract:[1666][1667]
    Her mood will needs be pitied.[1667]

    _Queen._                       What would she have?

    _Gent._ She speaks much of her father, says she hears[1666]
    There's tricks i' the world, and hems and beats her heart,         5
    Spurns enviously at straws; speaks things in doubt,
    That carry but half sense: her speech is nothing,
    Yet the unshaped use of it doth move
    The hearers to collection; they aim at it,[1668]
    And botch the words up fit to their own thoughts;[1669]           10
    Which, as her winks and nods and gestures yield them,[1670]
    Indeed would make one think there might be thought,[1671]
    Though nothing sure, yet much unhappily.

    _Hor._ 'Twere good she were spoken with, for she may strew[1672]
    Dangerous conjectures in ill-breeding minds.[1672]                15

    _Queen._ Let her come in.       [_Exit Gentleman._[1672][1673][1674]
    [_Aside_] To my sick soul, as sin's true nature is,[1674][1675][1676]
    Each toy seems prologue to some great amiss:[1676]
    So full of artless jealousy is guilt,[1676]
    It spills itself in fearing to be spilt.[1676][1677]              20

                 _Re-enter_ Gentleman, _with_ OPHELIA.

    _Oph._  Where is the beauteous majesty of Denmark?

    _Queen._  How now, Ophelia![1678]

    _Oph._ [_Sings_] How should I your true love know[1679][1680]
                  From another one?[1680]
                By his cockle hat and staff[1680]                     25
                  And his sandal shoon.[1680][1681]

    _Queen._ Alas, sweet lady, what imports this song?

    _Oph._ Say you? nay, pray you, mark.[1682]
    [_Sings_] He is dead and gone, lady,[1683][1684][1685]
                  He is dead and gone;[1684][1685]                    30
                At his head a grass-green turf,[1685][1686]
                  At his heels a stone.[1685]
    Oh, oh![1687]

    _Queen._ Nay, but, Ophelia,--

    _Oph._                        Pray you, mark.
    [_Sings_] White his shroud as the mountain snow,--

                          _Enter_ KING.[1688]

    _Queen._ Alas, look here, my lord.                                35

    _Oph._ [_Sings_] Larded with sweet flowers;[1689]
                Which bewept to the grave did go[1690]
                  With true-love showers.[1691]

    _King._ How do you, pretty lady?[1692]

    _Oph._ Well, God 'ild you! They say the owl was a[1693]           40
    baker's daughter. Lord, we know what we are, but know[1694]
    not what we may be. God be at your table![1695]

    _King._ Conceit upon her father.

    _Oph._ Pray you, let's have no words of this; but when[1696]
    they ask you what it means, say you this:                         45
    [_Sings_] To-morrow is Saint Valentine's day,[1697][1698][1699]
                  All in the morning betime,[1698][1700]
                And I a maid at your window,[1698]
                  To be your Valentine.[1698]
                Then up he rose, and donn'd his clothes,[1701][1702]  50
                  And dupp'd the chamber-door;[1701][1703]
                Let in the maid, that out a maid[1701][1704]
                  Never departed more.[1701]

    _King._ Pretty Ophelia!

    _Oph._ Indeed, la, without an oath, I'll make an end on't:[1705]  55
    [_Sings_] By Gis and by Saint Charity,[1706][1707]
                  Alack, and fie for shame![1707]
                Young men will do't, if they come to't;[1707]
                  By cock, they are to blame.[1707][1708]
                Quoth she, before you tumbled me,[1709][1710]         60
                  You promised me to wed.[1710]
    He answers:[1711]
                So would I ha' done, by yonder sun,
                  An thou hadst not come to my bed.[1712]

    _King._  How long hath she been thus?[1713]

    _Oph._ I hope all will be well. We must be patient: but           65
    I cannot choose but weep, to think they should lay him i'[1714]
    the cold ground. My brother shall know of it: and so I
    thank you for your good counsel. Come, my coach!
    Good night, ladies; good night, sweet ladies; good night,[1715]
    good night.                                 [_Exit._[1715][1716]  70

    _King._  Follow her close; give her good watch, I pray
              you.                                [_Exit Horatio._[1717]
    O, this is the poison of deep grief; it springs[1718]
    All from her father's death. O Gertrude, Gertrude,[1719]
    When sorrows come, they come not single spies,[1720]
    But in battalions! First, her father slain:[1721]                 75
    Next, your son gone; and he most violent author
    Of his own just remove: the people muddied,
    Thick and unwholesome in their thoughts and whispers,[1722]
    For good Polonius' death; and we have done but greenly,[1723]
    In hugger-mugger to inter him: poor Ophelia[1724]                 80
    Divided from herself and her fair judgement,
    Without the which we are pictures, or mere beasts:[1725]
    Last, and as much containing as all these,
    Her brother is in secret come from France,
    Feeds on his wonder, keeps himself in clouds,[1726]               85
    And wants not buzzers to infect his ear[1727]
    With pestilent speeches of his father's death;
    Wherein necessity, of matter beggar'd,[1728]
    Will nothing stick our person to arraign[1729]
    In ear and ear. O my dear Gertrude, this,                         90
    Like to a murdering-piece, in many places[1730][1731]
    Gives me superfluous death.                 [_A noise within._[1731]

    _Queen._                    Alack, what noise is this?[1732]

    _King._ Where are my Switzers? Let them guard the door.[1733][1734]

                   _Enter another_ Gentleman.[1734]

    What is the matter?[1734]

    _Gent._             Save yourself, my lord:[1734][1735]
    The ocean, overpeering of his list,                               95
    Eats not the flats with more impetuous haste[1736]
    Than young Laertes, in a riotous head,
    O'erbears your officers. The rabble call him lord;[1737]
    And, as the world were now but to begin,[1738]
    Antiquity forgot, custom not known,[1738]                        100
    The ratifiers and props of every word,[1738][1739][1740]
    They cry 'Choose we; Laertes shall be king!'[1739][1741]
    Caps, hands and tongues applaud it to the clouds,[1742]
    'Laertes shall be king, Laertes king!'[1743]

    _Queen._ How cheerfully on the false trail they cry!             105
    O, this is counter, you false Danish dogs!    [_Noise within._[1744]

    _King._ The doors are broke.

           _Enter_ LAERTES, _armed_; Danes _following_.[1745]

    _Laer._ Where is this king? Sirs, stand you all without.[1746]

    _Danes._ No, let's come in.[1747]

    _Laer._                     I pray you, give me leave.

    _Danes._  We will, we will.                                      110

                           [_They retire without the door._[1747][1748]

    _Laer._  I thank you: keep the door. O thou vile king,[1749][1750]
    Give me my father![1749]

    _Queen._           Calmly, good Laertes.

    _Laer._  That drop of blood that's calm proclaims me bastard;[1751]
    Cries cuckold to my father; brands the harlot
    Even here, between the chaste unsmirched brow[1752]              115
    Of my true mother.

    _King._            What is the cause, Laertes,
    That thy rebellion looks so giant-like?
    Let him go, Gertrude; do not fear our person:
    There's such divinity doth hedge a king,
    That treason can but peep to what it would,[1753]                120
    Acts little of his will. Tell me, Laertes,[1754]
    Why thou art thus incensed: let him go, Gertrude:[1755]
    Speak, man.

    _Laer._ Where is my father?

    _King._                     Dead.

    _Queen._                          But not by him.[1756]

    _King._ Let him demand his fill.                                 125

    _Laer._ How came he dead? I'll not be juggled with:
    To hell, allegiance! vows, to the blackest devil![1757]
    Conscience and grace, to the profoundest pit![1758]
    I dare damnation: to this point I stand,[1758]
    That both the worlds I give to negligence,                       130
    Let come what comes; only I'll be revenged
    Most throughly for my father.

    _King._                       Who shall stay you?

    _Laer._ My will, not all the world:[1759]
    And for my means, I'll husband them so well,
    They shall go far with little.[1760]

    _King._                        Good Laertes,[1761]               135
    If you desire to know the certainty[1761]
    Of your dear father's death, is't writ in your revenge,[1762]
    That, swoopstake, you will draw both friend and foe,[1763]
    Winner and loser?[1764]

    _Laer._ None but his enemies.

    _King._                       Will you know them then?[1765]     140

    _Laer._ To his good friends thus wide I'll ope my arms;[1766]
    And, like the kind life-rendering pelican,[1767]
    Repast them with my blood.[1768]

    _King._                    Why, now you speak
    Like a good child and a true gentleman.
    That I am guiltless of your father's death,                      145
    And am most sensibly in grief for it,[1769]
    It shall as level to your judgement pierce[1770]
    As day does to your eye.

    _Danes._ [_Within_] Let her come in.

    _Laer._ How now! what noise is that?

                       _Re-enter_ OPHELIA.[1771]

    O heat, dry up my brains! tears seven times salt,                150
    Burn out the sense and virtue of mine eye![1772]
    By heaven, thy madness shall be paid with weight,[1773]
    Till our scale turn the beam. O rose of May![1774]
    Dear maid, kind sister, sweet Ophelia!
    O heavens! is't possible a young maid's wits                     155
    Should be as mortal as an old man's life?[1775]
    Nature is fine in love, and where 'tis fine[1776][1777]
    It sends some precious instance of itself[1776][1777]
    After the thing it loves.[1776]

    _Oph._ [_Sings_] They bore him barefaced on the bier;[1778]      160
                Hey non nonny, nonny, hey nonny:[1779]
                And in his grave rain'd many a tear,--[1780]
    Fare you well, my dove![1781]

    _Laer._ Hadst thou thy wits, and didst persuade revenge,[1782]
    It could not move thus.[1782][1783]                              165

    _Oph._ [_Sings_] You must sing down a-down,[1784]
                An you call him a-down-a.[1785]
    O, how the wheel becomes it! It is the false steward, that[1786]
    stole his master's daughter.

    _Laer._  This nothing's more than matter.[1787]                  170

    _Oph._ There's rosemary, that's for remembrance: pray[1788][1789]
    you, love, remember: and there is pansies, that's for[1789][1790]
    thoughts.

    _Laer._ A document in madness; thoughts and remembrance
    fitted.                                                          175

    _Oph._ There's fennel for you, and columbines: there's
    rue for you; and here's some for me: we may call it herb[1791]
    of grace o' Sundays: O, you must wear your rue with a[1791][1792]
    difference. There's a daisy: I would give you some
    violets, but they withered all when my father died: they         180
    say a' made a good end,--[1793]

    [_Sings_] For bonny sweet Robin is all my joy.[1794]

    _Laer._  Thought and affliction, passion, hell itself,[1795]
    She turns to favour and to prettiness.

    _Oph._ [_Sings_] And will a' not come again?[1796][1797]         185
                And will a' not come again?[1797]
                  No, no, he is dead,[1798]
                  Go to thy death-bed,[1798][1799]
                He never will come again.

                His beard was as white as snow,[1800]                190
                All flaxen was his poll:[1801]
                  He is gone, he is gone,[1802]
                  And we cast away moan:[1802]
                God ha' mercy on his soul![1803]

    And of all Christian souls, I pray God. God be wi' you.          195

                                                          [_Exit._[1804]

    _Laer._  Do you see this, O God?[1805]

    _King._  Laertes, I must commune with your grief,[1806]
    Or you deny me right. Go but apart,
    Make choice of whom your wisest friends you will,
    And they shall hear and judge 'twixt you and me:                 200
    If by direct or by collateral hand[1807]
    They find us touch'd, we will our kingdom give,[1808]
    Our crown, our life, and all that we call ours,
    To you in satisfaction; but if not,
    Be you content to lend your patience to us,[1809]                205
    And we shall jointly labour with your soul
    To give it due content.

    _Laer._                 Let this be so;
    His means of death, his obscure funeral,[1810]
    No trophy, sword, nor hatchment o'er his bones,[1811]
    No noble rite nor formal ostentation,[1812]                      210
    Cry to be heard, as 'twere from heaven to earth,
    That I must call't in question.[1813]

    _King._                         So you shall;
    And where the offence is let the great axe fall.[1814]
    I pray you, go with me.                                   [_Exeunt._


SCENE VI. _Another room in the castle._

                 _Enter_ HORATIO _and a_ Servant.[1815]

    _Hor._ What are they that would speak with me?[1816]

    _Serv._ Sea-faring men, sir: they say they have letters
            for you.[1816][1817]

    _Hor._ Let them come in.                [_Exit Servant._[1816][1818]
    I do not know from what part of the world
    I should be greeted, if not from Lord Hamlet.[1819]                5

                         _Enter_ Sailors.[1820]

    _First Sail._ God bless you, sir.[1821][1822]

    _Hor._ Let him bless thee too.

    _First Sail._ He shall, sir, an't please him. There's a[1821][1823]
    letter for you, sir; it comes from the ambassador that was[1824]
    bound for England; if your name be Horatio, as I am let           10
    to know it is.

    _Hor._ [_Reads_] 'Horatio, when thou shalt have over-looked[1825]
    this, give these fellows some means to the king:
    they have letters for him. Ere we were two days old at
    sea, a pirate of very warlike appointment gave us chase.          15
    Finding ourselves too slow of sail, we put on a compelled
    valour: and in the grapple I boarded them: on the instant[1826]
    they got clear of our ship; so I alone became their prisoner.
    They have dealt with me like thieves of mercy:
    but they knew what they did; I am to do a good turn[1827]         20
    for them. Let the king have the letters I have sent; and
    repair thou to me with as much speed as thou wouldest[1828]
    fly death. I have words to speak in thine ear will make[1829]
    thee dumb; yet are they much too light for the bore of[1830]
    the matter. These good fellows will bring thee where I[1830]      25
    am. Rosencrantz and Guildenstern hold their course for
    England: of them I have much to tell thee. Farewell.[1831]
                   'He that thou knowest thine, HAMLET.'[1832]

    Come, I will make you way for these your letters;[1833]
    And do't the speedier, that you may direct me                     30
    To him from whom you brought them.                  [_Exeunt._[1834]


SCENE VII. _Another room in the castle._[1835]

                      _Enter_ KING _and_ LAERTES.

    _King._ Now must your conscience my acquittance seal,
    And you must put me in your heart for friend,
    Sith you have heard, and with a knowing ear,
    That he which hath your noble father slain[1836]
    Pursued my life.

    _Laer._          It well appears: but tell me                      5
    Why you proceeded not against these feats,[1837]
    So crimeful and so capital in nature,[1838]
    As by your safety, wisdom, all things else,[1839]
    You mainly were stirr'd up.

    _King._                     O, for two special reasons,[1840]
    Which may to you perhaps seem much unsinew'd,[1841]               10
    But yet to me they're strong. The queen his mother[1842]
    Lives almost by his looks; and for myself--
    My virtue or my plague, be it either which--[1843]
    She's so conjunctive to my life and soul,[1844]
    That, as the star moves not but in his sphere,                    15
    I could not but by her. The other motive,
    Why to a public count I might not go,
    Is the great love the general gender bear him;
    Who, dipping all his faults in their affection,
    Would, like the spring that turneth wood to stone,[1845]          20
    Convert his gyves to graces; so that my arrows,[1846]
    Too slightly timber'd for so loud a wind,[1847]
    Would have reverted to my bow again[1848]
    And not where I had aim'd them.[1849]

    _Laer._ And so have I a noble father lost;[1850]                  25
    A sister driven into desperate terms,
    Whose worth, if praises may go back again,[1851]
    Stood challenger on mount of all the age[1852]
    For her perfections: but my revenge will come.[1853]

    _King._ Break not your sleeps for that: you must not think[1854]  30
    That we are made of stuff so flat and dull
    That we can let our beard be shook with danger[1855]
    And think it pastime. You shortly shall hear more:[1856]
    I loved your father, and we love ourself;[1857]
    And that, I hope, will teach you to imagine--[1858]               35

                  _Enter a_ Messenger, _with letters_.

    How now! what news?[1859]

    _Mess._                   Letters, my lord, from Hamlet:
    This to your majesty; this to the queen.[1860]

    _King._ From Hamlet! who brought them?[1861]

    _Mess._ Sailors, my lord, they say; I saw them not:
    They were given me by Claudio; he received them                   40
    Of him that brought them.

    _King._                   Laertes, you shall hear them.[1862]
    Leave us.                                   [_Exit Messenger._[1863]

    [_Reads_] 'High and mighty, You shall know I am set[1864]
    naked on your kingdom. To-morrow shall I beg leave[1865]
    to see your kingly eyes: when I shall, first asking your[1866][1867]  45
    pardon thereunto, recount the occasion of my sudden and[1866][1868][1869]
    more strange return.[1869]
                                                'HAMLET.'[1870]

    What should this mean? Are all the rest come back?
    Or is it some abuse, and no such thing?[1871]                     50

    _Laer._ Know you the hand?

    _King._ Tis Hamlet's character. 'Naked!'[1872][1873]
    And in a postscript here, he says 'alone.'[1872][1873]
    Can you advise me?[1872][1874]

    _Laer._ I'm lost in it, my lord. But let him come;[1875]          55
    It warms the very sickness in my heart,
    That I shall live and tell him to his teeth,[1876]
    'Thus didest thou.'[1877]

    _King._             If it be so, Laertes,--[1878]
    As how should it be so? how otherwise?--[1878][1879]
    Will you be ruled by me?[1878]

    _Laer._                  Ay, my lord;[1880][1881]                 60
    So you will not o'errule me to a peace.[1880]

    _King._ To thine own peace. If he be now return'd,[1882]
    As checking at his voyage, and that he means[1883]
    No more to undertake it, I will work him
    To an exploit now ripe in my device,[1884]                        65
    Under the which he shall not choose but fall:
    And for his death no wind of blame shall breathe;
    But even his mother shall uncharge the practice,
    And call it accident.[1885]

    _Laer._               My lord, I will be ruled;[1886][1887]
    The rather, if you could devise it so[1886]                       70
    That I might be the organ.[1886][1888]

    _King._                    It falls right.[1886]
    You have been talk'd of since your travel much,[1886]
    And that in Hamlet's hearing, for a quality[1886]
    Wherein, they say, you shine: your sum of parts[1886]
    Did not together pluck such envy from him,[1886]                  75
    As did that one, and that in my regard[1886]
    Of the unworthiest siege.[1886]

    _Laer._                   What part is that, my lord?[1886]

    _King._ A very riband in the cap of youth,[1886][1889]
    Yet needful too; for youth no less becomes[1886]
    The light and careless livery that it wears[1886]                 80
    Than settled age his sables and his weeds,[1886]
    Importing health and graveness. Two months since,[1886][1890]
    Here was a gentleman of Normandy:--[1891]
    I've seen myself, and served against, the French,[1892]
    And they can well on horseback: but this gallant[1893]            85
    Had witchcraft in't; he grew unto his seat,[1894]
    And to such wondrous doing brought his horse
    As had he been incorpsed and demi-natured[1895]
    With the brave beast: so far he topp'd my thought[1896]
    That I, in forgery of shapes and tricks,                          90
    Come short of what he did.[1897]

    _Laer._                    A Norman was't?

    _King._ A Norman.

    _Laer._ Upon my life, Lamond.

    _King._                       The very same.[1898]

    _Laer._ I know him well: he is the brooch indeed
    And gem of all the nation.[1899]                                  95

    _King._ He made confession of you,[1900]
    And gave you such a masterly report,
    For art and exercise in your defence,
    And for your rapier most especial,[1901]
    That he cried out, 'twould be a sight indeed[1902]               100
    If one could match you: the scrimers of their nation.[1903][1904]
    He swore, had neither motion, guard, nor eye,[1903]
    If you opposed them. Sir, this report of his[1903]
    Did Hamlet so envenom with his envy[1905]
    That he could nothing do but wish and beg                        105
    Your sudden coming o'er, to play with him.[1906]
    Now, out of this--

    _Laer._            What out of this, my lord?

    _King._ Laertes, was your father dear to you?[1907]
    Or are you like the painting of a sorrow,
    A face without a heart?

    _Laer._                 Why ask you this?                        110

    _King._ Not that I think you did not love your father,
    But that I know love is begun by time,[1908]
    And that I see, in passages of proof,
    Time qualifies the spark and fire of it.
    There lives within the very flame of love[1909]                  115
    A kind of wick or snuff that will abate it;[1909][1910]
    And nothing is at a like goodness still,[1909]
    For goodness, growing to a plurisy,[1909][1911]
    Dies in his own too much: that we would do[1909][1912]
    We should do when we would; for this 'would' changes[1909][1913]  120
    And hath abatements and delays as many[1909]
    As there are tongues, are hands, are accidents,[1909][1914]
    And then this 'should' is like a spendthrift sigh,[1909][1913][1915]
    That hurts by easing. But, to the quick o' the ulcer:[1909]
    Hamlet comes back: what would you undertake,[1916]               125
    To show yourself your father's son in deed[1917]
    More than in words?

    _Laer._             To cut his throat i' the church.

    _King._ No place indeed should murder sanctuarize;[1918]
    Revenge should have no bounds. But, good Laertes,
    Will you do this, keep close within your chamber.[1919]          130
    Hamlet return'd shall know you are come home:
    We'll put on those shall praise your excellence
    And set a double varnish on the fame[1920]
    The Frenchman gave you; bring you in fine together[1921]
    And wager on your heads: he, being remiss,[1922]                 135
    Most generous and free from all contriving,
    Will not peruse the foils, so that with ease,[1923]
    Or with a little shuffling, you may choose
    A sword unbated, and in a pass of practice[1924]
    Requite him for your father.

    _Laer._                      I will do't                         140
    And for that purpose I'll anoint my sword.[1925]
    I bought an unction of a mountebank,
    So mortal that but dip a knife in it,[1926]
    Where it draws blood no cataplasm so rare,
    Collected from all simples that have virtue                      145
    Under the moon, can save the thing from death
    That is but scratch'd withal: I'll touch my point
    With this contagion, that, if I gall him slightly,[1927][1928]
    It may be death.[1927]

    _King._          Let's further think of this;
    Weigh what convenience both of time and means[1929]              150
    May fit us to our shape: if this should fail,[1930]
    And that our drift look through our bad performance,[1931]
    'Twere better not assay'd: therefore this project
    Should have a back or second, that might hold
    If this did blast in proof. Soft! let me see:[1932]              155
    We'll make a solemn wager on your cunnings:[1933]
    I ha't:[1934][1935]
    When in your motion you are hot and dry--[1935][1936]
    As make your bouts more violent to that end--[1937]
    And that he calls for drink, I'll have prepared him[1938]        160
    A chalice for the nonce; whereon but sipping,[1939]
    If he by chance escape your venom'd stuck,[1940]
    Our purpose may hold there. But stay, what noise?

                          _Enter_ QUEEN.[1941]

    How now, sweet queen![1942]

    _Queen._ One woe doth tread upon another's heel,[1943]           165
    So fast they follow: your sister's drown'd, Laertes.[1944]

    _Laer._ Drown'd! O, where?

    _Queen._ There is a willow grows aslant a brook,[1945]
    That shows his hoar leaves in the glassy stream;[1946]
    There with fantastic garlands did she come[1947]                 170
    Of crow-flowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples,
    That liberal shepherds give a grosser name,[1948]
    But our cold maids do dead men's fingers call them:[1949]
    There, on the pendent boughs her coronet weeds[1950]
    Clambering to hang, an envious sliver broke;[1951]               175
    When down her weedy trophies and herself[1952]
    Fell in the weeping brook. Her clothes spread wide,
    And mermaid-like awhile they bore her up:[1953]
    Which time she chanted snatches of old tunes,[1954]
    As one incapable of her own distress,                            180
    Or like a creature native and indued[1955]
    Unto that element: but long it could not be
    Till that her garments, heavy with their drink,[1956]
    Pull'd the poor wretch from her melodious lay[1957]
    To muddy death.

    _Laer._         Alas, then she is drown'd![1958]                 185

    _Queen._ Drown'd, drown'd.

    _Laer._ Too much of water hast thou, poor Ophelia,
    And therefore I forbid my tears: but yet
    It is our trick; nature her custom holds,
    Let shame say what it will: when these are gone,                 190
    The woman will be out. Adieu, my lord:
    I have a speech of fire that fain would blaze,[1959]
    But that this folly douts it.                         [_Exit._[1960]

    _King._                       Let's follow, Gertrude:
    How much I had to do to calm his rage![1961]
    Now fear I this will give it start again;                        195
    Therefore let's follow.                                   [_Exeunt._

FOOTNOTES:

[1571] ACT IV. SCENE I.] Q (1676) and Rowe.

A room....] A Royal apartment. Rowe. The same. Capell.

Enter....] Enter King, and Queene, with Rosencraus and Guyldensterne.
Qq (Eenter Q₂ Q₃). Enter King. Ff. Enter the King and Lordes. (Q₁).

[1572] _There's ... heaves:_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_matter_] Qq. _matters_ Ff.

_sighs, these ... heaves:_] _sighs, these ... heaves;_ Rowe. _sighes,
these ... heaves,_ Qq. _sighes. These ... heaves_ Ff.

[1573] &c. Queen.] Ger. or Gert. in Qq. _Bestow ... while._] Qq.
Omitted in Ff.

_a little while_] om. Seymour conj.

[Exeunt....] Q (1676) and Capell. To Ros. and Guild. who go out.
Theobald. om. Qq Ff.

[1574] _mine own_] Qq. _my good_ Ff.

_to-night!_] _to night?_ Qq Ff.

[1575] _Gertrude_] Ff. _Gertrard_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₆. _Gertrad_ Q₄. _Gertard_ Q₅.

_How_] _hast thou seen? and how_ Seymour conj.

[1576] _sea_] Qq. _seas_ Ff.

[1577] _mightier:_] _mightier;_ Rowe. _ightier,_ Q₂ Q₃ Ff. _mightier_
Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

_fit,_] Qq. _fit_ Ff.

[1578] _Whips out ... cries_] Qq (_Whyps_ Q₂ Q₃. _cryeis_ Q₄ Q₅). _He
whips his Rapier out, and cries_ Ff.

_'a rat, a rat!'_] _a rat!_ Pope, reading the rest of the line with Ff.

[1579] _this_] Qq. _his_ Ff.

[1580] _been_] Q₆ F₃ F₄. _beene_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _bin_ F₁. _bine_ F₂.

_been_] Q₂ Q₃ F₃ Q₆ F₄. _beene_ Q₄ F₁ F₂. _bin_ Q₅.

[1581] _answer'd_] Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _answered_ Ff Q₆.

[1582] _haunt_] _harm_ Johnson conj.

[1583] _let_] Qq. _let's_ F₁ F₃ F₄. _lets_ F₂.

[1584] _ore_] Qq F₄. _oare_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _or_ (i.e. _gold_) Johnson conj.

[1585] _metals_] _metal_ Mason conj.

[1586] _he_] Ff. _a_ Qq.

[1587] _O_] Q₂ Q₃. _Oh_ Ff. om. Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

[1588] _vile_] Qq F₄. _vilde_ F₁ F₂ F₃.

[1589] _Both ... Guildenstern!_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

Re-enter ...] Dyce. Enter Ros. & Guild. Qq (after line 31). After
_excuse_ in Ff.

[1590] _you with_] _with you_ Q (1676).

[1591] _mother's closet_] _Mother Clossets_ F₁.

_dragg'd_] _dreg'd_ Q₂ Q₃.

[1592] _I pray_] _Pray_ Pope.

[Exeunt ...] Ex. Ros. and Guild. Rowe. Exit Gent. Ff. om. Qq.

[1593] _And let_] Qq. _To let_ Ff.

[1594] See note (XXIII).

[1595] _his_] _its_ Theobald.

_poison'd_] _poysned_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _poysoned_ Q₅ Q₆.

[1596] SCENE II.] Pope.

Another....] Capell.

Enter Hamlet.] Ff. Enter Hamlet, Rosencraus, and others. Qq.

[1597] Ros. Guil. [Within] _... Hamlet!_] Gentlemen within. _Hamlet,
Lord Hamlet._ Ff. Omitted in Qq.

[1598] _But soft,_] See note (XXIV).

[1599] Enter....] Ff. om. Qq.

[1600] _Compounded_] _Compound_ Q₂ Q₃.

_'tis kin_] _it is kin_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆. _it is akin_ Q (1676).

[1601] _sponge!_] _sponge!--_ Steevens. _sponge,--_ Capell. _spunge,_
or _spundge,_ Qq Ff.

[1602] _like an ape_] Ff. _like an apple_ Qq. _like an ape, an apple_
Farmer conj. _like an ape doth nuts_ Singer, from (Q₁).

[1603] _with the king, but_] _not with the king, for_ Johnson conj.

[1604] _a thing--_] Ff. _a thing._ Qq. _nothing._ Hanmer.

[1605] _A thing_] _Nothing_ Hanmer.

_lord?_] Ff Q₆. _lord._ The rest.

[1606] _Of nothing:_] F₁. _Of nothing_ Qq. _Of nothing?_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _A
thing or nothing_ Hanmer. _Or nothing._ Johnson conj.

[1607] _Hide ... after._] Ff. Omitted in Qq.

[1608] SCENE III.] Pope.

Another....] Capell.

Enter King, attended.] Capell. Enter King, and two or three. Qq. Enter
King. Ff.

[1609] _I have_] _I've_ Pope.

[1610] _on_] _upon_ Keightley.

[1611] _weigh'd_] Ff. _wayed_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _waigh'd_ Q₆.

[1612] _never_] Qq. _neerer_ F₁ F₂. _nearer_ F₃ F₄. _ne'er_ Long MS.

_and even_] om. Pope. _even_ Jennens (a misprint).

[1613] Enter Rosencrantz.] Enter Rosencraus and all the rest. Qq. Enter
Rosencrane. F₁. Enter Rosincros. F₂ F₃ F₄.

[1614] _Ho, Guildenstern!_] _Hoa, Guildensterne?_ F₁. _Hoa,
Guildenstar?_ F₂ F₃. _Ho, Guildenstare?_ F₄. _How,_ Q₂ Q₃. _Hoe,_ Q₄
Q₅. _Ho,_ Q₆.

_Guildenstern_] om. Qq.

_my lord_] Ff. _the lord_ Qq. _the lord Hamlet_ Q (1676).

Enter ...] Ff. They enter. Qq.

[1615] _he is_] _a is_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄.

[1616] _convocation_] _convacation_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄.

_politic_] _politique_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _politick_ Q₅ Q₆. om. Ff. _palated_
Collier MS.

_e'en_] om. Pope.

[1617] _ourselves_] _our selfe_ F₁.

[1618] _service, two_] _service to_ F₁.

[1619] _but_] om. Pope.

[1620] King. _Alas, alas!_ Ham. _A ... that worm._] Qq. Omitted in Ff.

[1621] _and_] om. Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

[1622] _guts_] Qq F₁. _gut_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[1623] _indeed, if_] Ff. _indeed if_ Q₆. _if indeed_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.

_within_] Qq. om. Ff.

[1624] [To some Attendants.] Capell. om. Qq Ff.

[1625] _He_] Ff. _A_ Qq.

_you_] Qq. _ye_ Ff.

[Exeunt Attendants.] Capell. om. Qq Ff.

[1626] _deed, for thine_] Qq. _deed of thine, for thine_ Ff.

[1627] _With fiery quickness:_] Ff. Omitted in Qq.

_therefore_] _then_ Pope.

[1628] _at help_] _sits fair_ Q (1676). _at helm_ Johnson conj.

[1629] _is bent_] Qq. _at bent_ Ff.

[1630] _For England ... Good._] As one line first by Steevens (1793).

_England?_] F₁ Q₆ F₃ F₄. _England._ The rest.

[1631] _sees_] _knows_ Seymour conj.

_them_] Qq. _him_ Ff.

[1632] _and so_] (Q₁) Ff Q₆. _so_ The rest.

[1633] _Follow ... aboard:_] One line in Rowe. Two, the first ending
_foote,_ in Qq Ff.

_at foot_] om. Q (1676).

[1634] [Exeunt ...] Theobald. om. Qq Ff.

[1635] _set_] _let_ Pope (ed. 2). _set by_ Hanmer. _jet_ Becket conj.
_rate_ Anon. conj. _see_ Collier MS. See note (II).

[1636] _congruing_] Qq. _conjuring_ Ff.

[1637] _my haps ... begun_] Ff (_happes_ F₁). _my haps, my ioyes will
nere begin_ Qq. _my hopes, my joys are not begun_ Johnson conj. _'t
may hap, my joys will ne'er begin_ Heath conj. _my hopes, my joys were
ne're begun_ Collier MS.

[1638] SCENE IV.] Pope. SCENE II. Rowe.

A plain....] Capell. A camp. Rowe. A camp, on the Frontiers of Denmark.
Theobald.

Enter....] Edd. (Globe ed.) Enter Fortinbrasse with his Army over the
stage. Qq. Enter Fortinbras with an Armie. Ff. Enter Fortinbras, and
Forces, marching. Capell.

[1639] _greet the_] _to the_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[1640] _Craves_] Qq. _Claimes_ F₁ F₂. _Claims_ F₃ F₄.

[1641] _kingdom_] _realm_ Pope.

_rendezvous_] Q₄ Q₅ Q₆. _randevous_ Q₂ Q₃. _rendevous_ F₁. _rendevouz_
F₂ F₃ F₄.

[1642] _duty_] _durie_ F₂.

[1643] _Go ... sir?_] As four lines, ending _these?... sir, ... Who ...
sir?_ in Steevens (1793).

[1644] _softly_] Qq. _safely_ Ff.

[Exeunt....] Exit Fortinbras, with the Army. Theobald. Exit. Ff. om. Qq.

Enter ... and others.] Dyce. Enter ... Rosincrantz, Guildenstern, &c.
Theobald. Enter Hamlet, Rosencraus, &c. Qq. Omitted in Ff.

[1645] Ham. _Good sir, ... worth!_] Qq. Omitted in Ff.

[1646] _They_] _The_ Q₄.

[1647] _purposed_] _purposd_ Q₂ Q₃. _proposd_ Q₄ Q₅. _propos'd_ Q₆.

[1648] _Against_] _Sir, against_ Capell, reading lines 9-13 as three
lines, ending _sir ... against ... sir?_

[1649] _to_] _of_ Q₆.

[1650] _speak_] _speak it_ Pope. _speak, sir_ Capell. _speak on't_
Anon. conj.

_no_] _no more_ Anon. conj.

[1651] _five ducats, five,_] _fiue duckets, fiue_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _five
duckets, five_ Q₆. _five ducats--five,_ Theobald. _five ducats fine_
Theobald conj. (withdrawn). _five ducats; fly!_ Jackson conj.

[1652] _sold_] _so_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[1653] _Yes, it is_] _O, yes, it is_ Capell. _Nay, 'tis_ Q (1676) and
Rowe. _Yes, 'tis_ Pope.

[1654] _Two_] _Ten_ S. Walker conj.

_twenty_] _many_ Hanmer.

[1655] _Two ... straw:_] To be continued to Cap. Anon. conj. (Gent.
Mag. LX. 403).

[1656] _be wi' you_] Capell. _buy you_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _buy your_ Q₆. _b'
w' ye_ Q (1676) and Rowe.

[1657] _I'll_] _Ile_ Qq. _I will_ Capell (ending the line _straight_).
_I will_ Malone.

_straight_] om. Pope.

[Exeunt.] Exe. Manet Hamlet. Rowe. om. Qq.

[1658] _fust_] _rust_ Rowe.

[1659] _know Why yet I live_] _know. Why yet live I_ Anon. conj. MS.

[1660] _Rightly ... to stir_] _'Tis not to be great Never to stir_ Pope.

[1661] _to stir_] _to never stir_ Bullock conj.

[1662] _imminent_] Q₆. _iminent_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _eminent_ Q (1703) and
Rowe.

[1663] _plot_] _spot_ Pope. _plat_ Jennens conj.

[1664] _slain_] _slain men_ or _slaughter'd_ Anon. conj.

_O,_] _O then_ Pope.

[1665] SCENE V.] Pope. SCENE III. Rowe.

Elsinore. A room....] Capell. A Palace. Rowe.

Enter....] Pope. Enter Horatio, Gertrard, and a Gentleman. Qq. Enter
Queene and Horatio. Ff. Enter Queen, Horatio, and Attendants. Rowe.
Enter Queen, and a Gentleman. Hanmer. Enter Queen, attended; Horatio,
and a Gentleman. Capell.

[1666] Gent.] Gent. or Gen. Qq. Hor. Ff.

[1667] _She ... pitied._] As in Capell. Two lines, the first ending
_importunat,_ in Qq. Prose in Ff.

_distract: ... pitied._] _distracted, and deserves pity._ Q (1676).

[1668] _collection; ... it_] _collect at what they aim_ Long MS.
(obliterated).

_aim_] F₃ F₄. _ayme_ F₁ F₂. _yawne_ Qq. _yearn_ Anon. conj.

[1669] _botch_] _both_ F₃ F₄.

[1670] _as her_] _as_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆. _at her_ F₃ F₄.

[1671] _might_] Qq. _would_ Ff.

_thought_] _thoughts_ F₃ F₄. _meant or seen_ Staunton conj.

[1672] Hor. _'Twere ... minds._ Queen. _Let ... in._] Arranged as by
Collier (Blackstone conj.) See note (XXV).

[1673] [Exit Gentleman.] Hanmer. Exit Hor. Johnson, om. Qq Ff.

[1674] _in. To_] Qq F₁. _in To_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[1675] [Aside] Edd. om. Qq Ff.

[1676] _To my ... spilt._] Marked with inverted commas in Qq.

[1677] Re-enter....] Edd. Enter Ophelia. Qq (after line 16). Enter
Ophelia distracted. Ff. Enter Horatio, with Ophelia, distracted.
Johnson. Enter Ophelia, wildly. Capell. Re-enter Horatio, with Ophelia.
Steevens (1778).

[1678] _Ophelia!_] _Ophelia?_ Q₂ Q₃ Ff Q₆. _Ophelia._ Q₄ Q₅.

[1679] [Sings] shee sings, Q₂ Q₃. she sings. Q₄ Q₅ Q₆. om. Ff.

[1680] _How ... shoon_] Four lines in Capell. Two in Qq Ff.

[1681] _And his_] _and by his_ Q₆.

_sandal_] Ff. _sendall_ Qq.

[1682] _Say you?_] Ff. _Say you,_ Qq.

[1683] [Sings] Song. Qq. om. Ff.

[1684] _He is ... He is_] _He's ... he is_ Pope. _He's ... he's_ Hanmer.

[1685] _He ... stone._] Four lines in Capell. Two in Qq Ff.

[1686] _grass-green_] _green grass_ Elze (Percy's Reliques).

[1687] _Oh, oh!_] _O ho._ Qq. om. Ff.

[1688] _his_] _the_ Warburton.

[Sings] Capell. om. Qq Ff.

Enter King.] Qq. After _stone_, line 32, in Ff.

[1689] [Sings] Song. Q₆. Song. Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅ (opposite line 37). om. Ff.

_Larded_] (Q₁) Ff. _Larded all_ Qq.

[1690] _bewept_] (Q₁) Ff. _beweept_ Qq. _unbewept_ Keightley, reading
_did not_ with Qq Ff.

_grave_] (Q₁) Ff. _ground_ Qq.

_did_] Pope. _did not_ Qq Ff.

[1691] _true-love_] Hyphened in Ff.

_showers_] _flowers_ F₃ F₄.

[1692] _you_] Qq. _ye_ Ff.

[1693] _God 'ild_] Capell. _good dild_ Qq. _God dil'd_ Ff. _Godild_
Hanmer. _God yield_ Warburton. _God 'ield_ Johnson.

[1694] _but know_] _but we know_ Johnson.

[1695] _God ... table!_] om. Q (1676).

[1696] _Pray you, let's_] _Pray you let's_ F₁ F₂. _Pray lets_ Qq
(_let's_ Q₆). _Pray you let us_ F₃ F₄. _Pray let us_ Pope.

[1697] [Sings] Song. Qq. om. Ff.

[1698] _To-morrow ... Valentine._] Four lines in Qq. Two in Ff.

[1699] _To-morrow is_] _Good Morrow, 'tis_ Steevens, 1793 (Farmer conj.)

[1700] _morning_] Qq F₁. _morne_ F₂. _morn_ F₃ F₄.

[1701] _Then ... more._] Four lines in Johnson. Two in Qq Ff. Six in
Capell.

[1702] _clothes_] F₁ Q₆ F₃. _close_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _cloathes_ F₂.
_cloths_ F₄.

[1703] _dupp'd_] _dupt_ Qq Ff. _op'd_ Hanmer. _do'pt_ Warburton.
_d'op'd_ Capell.

[1704] _the maid, that out_] Qq F₁. _the maid, let in_ F₂. _a maid,
that out_ F₃ F₄. _a maid, but out_ Hanmer.

[1705] _Indeed, la,_] _Indeed la?_ Ff. _Indeede_ Q₂ Q₃. _Indeed_ Q₄ Q₅.
_Indeed,_ Q₆. _Indeed?_ Pope.

[1706] [Sings] Capell. om. Qq Ff.

_Gis_] F₃ F₄. _gis_ Qq F₁ F₂. _Cis_ Johnson conj.

[1707] _By ... blame._] Four lines in Qq Ff. Six in Capell.

[1708] _to blame_] Q₅ Q₆ F₃ F₄. _too blame_ The rest.

[1709] _Quoth she, before_] _Before, quoth she,_ Capell.

[1710] _Quoth ... wed._] Two lines in Ff. One in Qq. Three lines in
Capell.

[1711] _He answers:_] _(He answers.)_ Qq. Omitted in Ff.

_So ... sun,_] Two lines in Capell.

_would_] Q₂ Q₃ Ff. _should_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

_ha' done_] _ha done_ Ff. _a done_ Qq.

[1712] _An_] Hanmer. _And_ Qq Ff.

[1713] _been thus_] _bin this_ F₁.

[1714] _should_] Ff. _would_ Qq.

[1715] _Good ... good ... good ... good_] _God ... god ... god ... god_
Q₂ Q₃. _God ... God ... God ... God_ Q₄ Q₅.

_night, sweet ... night._] Pointed as in Ff, substantially. _night.
Sweet ... night._ Qq, reading _Sweet ... night_ as a separate line.

[1716] [Exit.] Ff. om. Qq.

[1717] _Follow ... you._] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[Exit Horatio.] Theobald. Exeunt Hor. and Att. Capell. om. Qq Ff.

[1718] _O, this_] _This_ Pope.

[1719] _death. O_] _death. Oh_ Ff. _death, and now behold, ô_ Qq,
reading lines 72, 73 as prose.

[1720] _come, they_] _comes, they_ F₁.

_spies_] _spyes_ Q₂ Q₃. _spies_ The rest. _files_ Anon. conj. (Gent.
Mag. LX. 307).

[1721] _battalions_] Q (1676) and Rowe. _battalians_ Qq. _battaliaes_
F₁ F₂. _battels_ F₃ F₄.

[1722] _their_] Ff. om. Qq.

[1723] _and we have_] _We've_ Pope.

_but greenly,_] om. Q (1676).

[1724] _In hugger-mugger_] _Obscurely_ Q (1676). _In private_ Pope.
Omitted by Capell, ending the previous line at _done_.

[1725] _the which we are_] _which we are but_ Q₆. _the which we're_
Pope.

[1726] _Feeds on his wonder_] Johnson. _Feeds on this wonder_ Qq.
_Keepes on his wonder_ Ff (_Keeps_ F₃ F₄). _Feeds on his anger_ Hanmer.

_in clouds_] _inclos'd_ Thirlby conj.

[1727] _buzzers_] _whispers_ Q (1676).

[1728] _Wherein_] Qq. _Where in_ Ff.

_Wherein necessity_] _Whence animosity_ Hanmer.

[1729] _person_] Qq. _persons_ Ff.

[1730] _murdering-piece_] Hyphen inserted in Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

[1731] _places Gives_] Qq. _places, Gives_ Ff.

[1732] Queen. _Alack, ... this?_] Ff. Omitted in Qq.

[1733] SCENE VI. Pope.

_Where_] Ff. _Attend, where_ Qq.

_are_] _is_ Q₂ Q₃.

_Switzers_] Ff. _Swissers_ Qq.

[1734] _Let ... matter_] As in Qq. One line in Ff.

Enter another Gentleman.] Enter a Gentleman, hastily. Capell. Enter a
Messenger. Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅ Ff, after _death_, line 92. Enter Messenger. Q₆.

[1735] Gent.] Gen. Capell. Messen. Qq. Mes. Ff.

[1736] _Eats_] _Beats_ Williams conj.

_impetuous_] _impitious_ Q₂ Q₃. _impittious_ F₁.

[1737] _lord_] _king_ Collier MS.

[1738] _And ... word,_] Put in a parenthesis, Anon. conj. (Gent. Mag.
LX. 403).

[1739] _The ... shall be king!_] _The ... to be king,_ Q₆. _The ... for
our king,_ Q (1676) and Rowe. _They cry ... for our king: The
ratifiers ... word_ Hanmer.

[1740] _word_] _ward_ Warburton. _weal_ Johnson conj. _work_ Capell
(Tyrwhitt conj.)

[1741] _They_] _The_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.

_we;_] _we,_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _we?_ Ff. _we_ Q₆.

[1742] _tongues_] _shouts_ Hanmer.

[1743] [Noise again, and Shouts: Door assaulted. Capell.

[1744] [Noise within.] Ff. A noise within. Qq, opposite to line 105.

[1745] Enter ... following.] Capell. Enter Laertes with others. Qq,
after line 106. Enter Laertes. Ff, after line 106. Enter Laertes, with
a Party at the Door. Theobald.

[1746] _this king? Sirs_] Qq. _the king, sirs?_ Ff.

[1747] Danes.] Dan. Capell. All. Qq Ff.

[1748] [They retire....] Capell. Exeunt. Theobald. om. Qq Ff.

[1749] _O thou ... father!_] Arranged as in Qq. One line in Ff.

[1750] _vile_] Qq F₄. _vilde_ F₁ F₂. _vild_ F₃.

[1751] _That ... bastard;_] One line in Qq. Two lines in Ff.

_that's calm_] _that's calme_ Q₅ Q₆. _thats calme_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _that
calmes_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _that calms_ F₄.

[1752] _unsmirched brow_] _unsmitched brow_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _brows_ Q (1676).
_and unsmich'd brow_ Pope. _and unsmirch'd brow_ Theobald. _and
unsmirch'd brows_ Johnson. _unsmirched brows_ Grant White.

[1753] _can but_] _cannot_ Q₄ Q₅.

_can but peep to_] _dares not reach at_ Q (1676).

[1754] _Acts_] _Act's_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _Act_ Hanmer.

_his_] _its_ Pope.

[1755] _thou art_] _art thou_ F₃ F₄. _are you_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[1756] _Where is_] Qq. _Wheres_ F₁ F₂. _Where's_ F₃ F₄.

_Dead_] _Dead, Laertes_ Capell.

[1757] _blackest_] _black_ Hanmer.

[1758] _grace, to ... pit! I_] _grace, to ... pit. I_ Ff. _grace,
to ... pit I_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _grace to ... pit, I_ Q₆.

[1759] _world_] Ff. _worlds_ Qq. _world's_ Hanmer.

[1760] _They_] _The_ Q₄.

[1761] _Good ... certainty_] As in Ff. _One line in_ Qq.

[1762] _father's death_] F₃ F₄. _fathers death_ F₁ F₂. _father_ Qq.

_is't_] Q₆. _i'st_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _if_ Ff. _if 'tis not_ Rowe.

[1763] _That, swoopstake_] _Swoop-stake-like_ (Q₁). _That soopstake_
Q₂ Q₃. _That soope-stake_ Q₄. _That soop-stake_ Q₅ Ff Q₆. (_That
sweep-stake_) Pope. _That, sweep-stake_ Johnson.

_you will_] _will you_ Hanmer (Theobald conj.)

[1764] _loser?_] Q₆. _loser._ F₄. _looser._ The rest.

[1765] _then?_] Qq F₄. _then._ The rest.

[1766] _his good friends_] _this, good friends_, Q (1676).

_ope_] _hope_ F₂.

[1767] _pelican_] _Politician_ F₁.

[1768] _Repast_] _Relieve_ Q (1676).

_Why, now you speak_] _Why now? what noyse is that?_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[1769] _sensibly_] _sencibly_ Q₂ Q₃. _sencible_ Q₄. _sensible_ The rest.

[1770] _pierce_] Ff. _peare_ Qq. _lye_ Q (1676). _'pear_ Johnson.

SCENE VII. Pope.

Danes. [Within] Capell. See note (XXVI).

[1771] Re-enter....] Collier. Enter Ophelia, fantastically drest with
Straws and Flowers. Rowe.

[1772] _Burn out_] _Burn on_ Pope (ed. 1).

[1773] _with_] Qq. _by_ Ff.

[1774] _Till_] _Tell_ Q₂ Q₃.

_turn_] _turne_ Qq. _turnes_ F₁ F₂. _turns_ F₃ F₄.

[1775] _an old_] Ff. _a poore_ Qq. _a sick_ Q (1676).

[1776] _Nature ... loves._] Ff. Omitted in Qq.

[1777] _fine ... fine, ... instance_] _fire ... fire, ... incense_ Pope
conj. _fal'n ... fal'n, ... instance_ Warburton.

[1778] _barefaced_] _bure-faste_ Q₂ Q₃.

[Sings] Song. Qq. om. Ff.

[1779] _Hey ... nonny:_] _Hey ... nony:_ or _Hey ... noney:_ Ff.
Omitted in Qq.

[1780] _in_] Qq. _on_ Ff.

_rain'd_] Qq. _raines_ F₁ F₂. _rains_ F₃ F₄. _remains_ Warburton.
_rain_ Collier MS. See note (II).

[1781] _Fare ... dove!_] See note (XXVII).

[1782] _Hadst ... thus._] Verse in Qq. Prose in Ff.

[1783] _move_] _move me_ S. Walker conj.

[1784] See note (XXVIII).

[1785] _An_] _an_ Capell. _And_ Qq. and Ff.

[1786] _wheel becomes it_] _wheele becomes it_ Qq F₁. _wheeles become
it_ F₂. _wheels become?_ F₃ F₄. _weal becomes it_ Warburton.

[1787] _nothing's_] _nothing is much_ Q (1676).

[1788] _There's ... remembrance:_] Prose in Qq. One line in Ff.

_that's_] _that_ Q₄ Q₅.

[1789] _pray you_] Qq. _Pray_ Ff.

[1790] _there is_] _there's_ Q₆ F₃ F₄.

_pansies_] Johnson. _paconcies_ F₁. _pancies_ The rest.

[1791] _herb of grace_] _herbe of grace_ Qq. _herbe-grace_ Ff (_herb_
F₃ F₄). _hearb a grace_ (Q₁).

[1792] _o'_] Theobald. _a_ Qq Ff.

_O, you must_] _Oh you must_ or _O you must_ Ff. _you may_ Qq. _you
must_ (Q₁).

[1793] _a' made_] _a made_ Qq. _he made_ Ff.

[1794] [Sings] Capell. om. Qq Ff.

[1795] _Thought_] _Thoughts_ (Q₁) Q₆.

_affliction_] Ff. _afflictions_ (Q₁) Qq.

[1796] [Sings] Song. Qq. om. Ff.

[1797] _a' ... a'_] _a ... a_ Qq. _he ... he_ Ff.

[1798] Two lines in Johnson. One in Qq Ff.

[1799] _Go to thy_] _Gone to his_ Collier (Collier MS.)

[1800] _was as_] Qq. _as_ Ff. _was_ Collier (Collier MS.)

[1801] _All flaxen_] Ff. _Flaxen_ Qq.

_poll_] Johnson. _pole_ Qq Ff.

[1802] _He ... moan:_] Two lines in Johnson. One in Qq Ff.

[1803] _God ha' mercy_] Collier. _God a mercy_ Qq. _Gramercy_ Ff. _God
a' mercy_ Steevens (1778).

[1804] _of_] Q₂ Q₃ Ff. om. Q₄ Q₅ Q₆. _on_ Johnson.

_Christian_] Ff Q₆. _Christians_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.

_I pray God_] Ff. om. Qq.

_God be wi' you_] _God buy you_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₆. _God buy yous,_ Q₄ Q₅. _God
buy ye_ F₁ F₂. _God bu'ye_ F₃. _God b' w' ye_ F₄. See note (XXIX).

[Exit.] Exit dancing distractedly. Collier MS.

[1805] _Do you see this, O God?_] Capell. _Doe you this ô God._ Qq
_(God!_ Q₆). _Do you see this, you Gods?_ Ff.

[1806] _commune_] Qq F₂ F₃ F₄. _common_ F₁.

[1807] _collateral_] F₃ F₄. _colaturall_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _collaturall_ Q₅.
_colaterall_ F₁. _collaterall_ F₂ Q₆.

[1808] _kingdom_] _kindome_ Q₄.

[1809] _patience_] _paience_ F₂.

[1810] _funeral_] _funerall_ Qq. _buriall_ F₁ F₂. _burial_ F₃ F₄.

[1811] _trophy_] _trophe_ Q₂ Q₃. _trophae_ Q₄ Q₅. _trophee_ Ff. trophey
Q₆.

[1812] _rite_] Ff. _right_ Qq.

[1813] _call't_] Qq. _call_ Ff.

[1814] _axe_] _tax_ Warburton.

[1815] SCENE VI.] Capell. SCENE VIII. Pope.

Another ...] Another Room in the same. Capell.

Enter ...] Capell. Enter Horatio, with an Attendant. Ff. Enter Horatio
and others. Qq.

[1816] _What ... in._] Verse by Capell, ending the lines _sir ... in._

[1817] Serv.] Ser. Ff. Gent. or Gen. Qq.

_Sea-faring men_] Qq. _Saylors_ F₁ F₂. _Sailors_ F₃ F₄.

[1818] [Exit Servant.] Capell. om. Qq Ff.

[1819] _greeted, if_] Ff Q₆. _greeted. If_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.

[1820] Enter Sailors.] Enter Saylers. Qq. Enter Saylor. Ff (Sailor F₄).

[1821] First Sail.] 1. S. Capell. Say. Qq F₁ F₂. Sayl. F₃. Sail. F₄.

[1822] _you_] _your_ F₂.

[1823] _He_] Ff. _A_ Qq.

_an't_] Q₆ F₄. _and_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _and't_ F₁ F₂ F₃.

[1824] _comes_] Ff. _came_ Qq.

_ambassador_] _embassador_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _Ambassadours_ F₁ F₂ F₃.
_embassadour_ Q₆. _Ambassadour_ F₄.

[1825] Hor. [Reads] Reads the Letter. Ff. Hor. Qq.

[1826] _and in_] Qq. _in_ Ff.

_on the instant_] _in the instant_ Q₆.

[1827] _good_] Ff. om. Qq.

[1828] _speed_] Q₄ Q₅ Q₆. _speede_ Q₂ Q₃. _hast_ F₁ F₂. _haste_ F₃ F₄.

_wouldest_] Q₂ Q₃ F₁ F₂ F₃. _wouldst_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆ F₄.

[1829] _thine_] Qq. _your_ Ff. _thy_ Pope.

[1830] _bore of the_] Ff. _bord of the_ Qq. om. Q (1676) and Pope.

[1831] _much_] _as much_ F₃ F₄.

[1832] _He that ... thine, Hamlet._] Ff. _So that ... thine Hamlet._ Q₂
Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _So that ... thine, Hamlet._ Q₆. _Hamlet._ Q (1676).

[1833] _make_] Q₄ Q₅ Q₆. _give_ Ff. om. Q₂ Q₃.

[1834] [Exeunt.] Qq. Exit. Ff.

[1835] SCENE VII.] Capell. SCENE IX. Pope.

Another ... castle.] Another ... same. Capell.

[1836] _which_] _who_ Q (1676).

[1837] _proceeded_] Ff. _proceede_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _proceed_ Q₅ Q₆.

[1838] _crimeful_] F₄. _crimefull_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _criminall_ Qq.

_and so_] _and_ Q₆.

[1839] _safety_] Ff. _safetie, greatnes_ Q₂ Q₃. _safety, greatnes_ Q₄.
_safetie, greatnesse_ Q₅. _safety, greatnesse_ Q₆.

[1840] _O, for two_] _For two_ Q (1676). _Two_ Pope.

[1841] _unsinew'd_] _unsinnow'd_ Qq. _unsinnowed_ F₁ F₂. _unsinewed_ F₃
F₄.

[1842] _But_] Qq. _And_ Ff.

_they're_] _tha'r_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _tha're_ Q₆. _they are_ Ff. _are_ Pope.

[1843] _be it_] _be't_ Pope.

[1844] _She's so conjunctive_] Ff (_Shes_ F₂). _She is so concliue_ Qq.
_She is so precious_ Q (1676).

[1845] _Would_] Ff. _Worke_ Qq.

[1846] _gyves_] F₁ F₂ Q₆ F₃. _gives_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅ F₄. _gybes_ Theobald
conj. (withdrawn).

_that_] om. Pope.

[1847] _timber'd_] _tymberd_ Q₂ Q₃. _tymbered_ Q₄. _timbered_ Q₅ Q₆.
_timbred_ Ff.

_loud a wind_] Ff (_winde_ F₁). _loued Arm'd_ Q₂ Q₃. _loued armes_ Q₄
Q₅. _loved armes_ Q₆. _loved, arm'd_ Jennens.

[1848] _bow_] _brow_ Long MS.

[1849] _And_] Ff. _But_ Qq.

_not_] _not gone_ Keightley conj.

_had_] Ff. _have_ Qq.

_aim'd_] _arm'd_ F₁.

[1850] _have I_] _I have_ Q₅ Q₆.

[1851] _Whose worth_] Qq. _Who was_ Ff. _Who has_ Johnson.

[1852] _Stood_] _Sole_ Collier MS.

_on mount_] _on the mount_ Q (1676).

[1853] _my_] om. Pope.

[1854] _Break ... think_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[1855] _beard_] _berd_ Q₄. _beards_ Q₆.

_with danger_] _of danger_ Capell conj.

[1856] _pastime_] _pasttime_ F₂.

_shortly shall_] _shall soon_ Pope.

[1857] _ourself_] _your selfe_ F₂. _your self_ F₃ F₄.

[1858] _imagine--_] Ff. _imagine._ Qq.

Enter....] Qq. Enter a Messenger. Ff.

[1859] _How ... news?_] Ff. Omitted in Qq.

_Letters ... Hamlet:_] Ff. Omitted in Qq.

[1860] _This_] Ff. _These_ Qq.

[1861] _Hamlet!_] _Hamlet?_ Ff Q₆. _Hamlet,_ The rest.

[1862] _Of ... them._] Omitted in Ff.

_him_] _them_ S. Walker conj.

_hear_] om. F₂. _read_ F₃ F₄.

[1863] _us._] _us, all--_ Pope, reading _Laertes ... all--_ as one line.

[Exit....] Ff. om. Qq.

[1864] [Reads] Capell. om. Qq Ff.

[1865] _shall I_] _I shall_ Jennens.

[1866] _first ... thereunto,_] _(first ... pardon) thereunto_ Q (1676).

[1867] _asking your_] _asking you_ Q (1676) and Rowe.

[1868] _occasion_] Qq. _occasions_ Ff.

[1869] _and more strange_] Ff. Omitted in Qq. _and most strange_ Anon
conj.

[1870] _HAMLET._] Ff. Omitted in Qq.

[1871] _abuse, and_] Qq. _abuse? Or_ Ff.

[1872] _'Tis ... me?_] Divided as in Qq. Prose in Ff. Pope ends the
lines _character; ... says) ... me?_

[1873] _'Naked!' ... 'alone'._] Marked as quotations first by Johnson.

[1874] _advise_] Ff. _devise_ Qq.

[1875] _I'm_] Ff. _I am_ Qq.

[1876] _shall_] Ff. om. Qq.

_and tell_] _to tell_ Hanmer.

[1877] _didest_] _diddest_ Ff. _didst_ Qq.

[1878] _If it ... me?_] Arranged as in Qq. Two lines, the first ending
_so?_, in Ff.

[1879] _should it_] _should it but_ Keightley. _should't not_ Anon.
conj.

[1880] _Ay ... peace._] Arranged as by Steevens. One line in Qq.

_Ay ... So you will_] _I my lord, so you will_ Qq. _If so you'l_ Ff.
_I, so you'll_ Pope. _Ay; so you'll_ Johnson. _I will, my lord; So you
will_ Capell, ending the first line at _lord_.

[1881] _lord_] _good lord_ S. Walker conj.

[1882] _return'd_] _returned_ Qq.

[1883] _checking at_] Ff. _the King at_ Q₂ Q₃. _liking not_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.
_kecking at_ Long MS.

[1884] _device_] Ff Q₆. _devise_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.

[1885] _accident_] _accedent_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄.

[1886] Laer. _My Lord ... graveness._] Qq. Omitted in Ff.

[1887] _My Lord,_] om. Pope.

[1888] _organ_] _instrument_ Q(1676) and Rowe.

[1889] _riband_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆. _ribaud_ Q₂ Q₃. _feather_ Q(1676) and Rowe.

[1890] _health_] _wealth_ Warburton.

_Two months since_] Qq. _Some two months hence_ Ff.

[1891] _Normandy:--_] _Normandy._ Ff. _Normandy,_ Qq.

[1892] _I've_] Ff. _I have_ Qq.

[1893] _can_] Qq. _ran_ Ff.

[1894] _unto_] Qq. _into_ Ff.

[1895] _had he_] _he had_ Q₆.

[1896] _topp'd_] _topt_ Qq. _past_ Ff.

_my thought_] Ff Q₆. _me thought_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.

[1897] _Come_] _Came_ Capell conj.

[1898] _Lamond_] Pope. _Lamound_ Ff. _Lamord_ Qq. _Lamode_ Malone conj.
_Lamont_ Grant White.

_very_] om. Warburton.

[1899] _the_] Qq. _our_ Ff. _that_ Collier MS. See note (II).

[1900] _He made_] _Hee mad_ F₁.

[1901] _especial_] _especiall_ Qq. _especiallyͨ_ F₁. _especially_ F₂ F₃
F₄.

[1902] _sight_] _fight_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[1903] _you: the ... them. Sir, this_] _you; the ... them; sir this_
Qq. _you Sir. This_ Ff. omitting _the ... them,_ lines 101-103. _you.
This_ Pope, following Ff.

[1904] _the scrimers_] Q₄ Q₅ Q₆. _the scrimures_ Q₂ Q₃. _the fencers_ Q
(1676). _th' escrimeurs_ Grant White.

[1905] _his_] _your_ S. Walker conj.

[1906] _o'er_] _ore_ Qq F₁. _over_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

_him_] Ff. _you_ Q₄.

[1907] _this--_] Rowe. _this._ Qq Ff.

_What_] Qq. _Why_ Ff.

[1908] _But ... by time_] _Love is begun betime: but that I know,_
Becket conj.

_begun_] _begone_ or _by-gone_ Mason conj. _benumb'd_ Jackson conj.

_by time_] _betime_ Seymour conj.

_begun_] _begnawn_ Bailey conj.

[1909] _There ... ulcer:_] Qq. Omitted in Ff.

[1910] _wick_] Rowe (ed. 2). _weeke_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _wicke_ Q₆.

[1911] _plurisy_] _plurisie_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _pleurisie_ Q₆. _plethory_
Hanmer (Warburton conj.)

[1912] _that_] _what_ Pope.

[1913] _'would' ... 'should'_] Put in italics in Q₅ Q₆.

[1914] _accidents_] _accedents_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄.

[1915] _spendthrift sigh_] _spend-thrift sigh_ Q₆. _spend thrifts sigh_
Q₂ Q₃. _spend-thrifts sigh_ Q₄ Q₅. _spend-thrift's sign_ Warburton.

[1916] _Hamlet comes_] Qq F₁. _Hamlet come_ F₂ F₃. _Hamlet, come_ F₄.

[1917] _your ... in deed_] F₄. _your fathers sonne indeed_ F₁ F₂. _your
father's son indeed_ F₃. _indeede your fathers sonne_ Qq (_indeed_ Q₄
Q₅ Q₆).

[1918] _sanctuarize_] _sanctuarise_ Q₂ Q₃. _sancturize_ F₁.

[1919] _this, ... chamber._] Pointed substantially as by Steevens
(1778). _this, ... chamber,_ Q₂ Q₃ F₁ _this, ... chamber_ Q₄ Q₅.
_this?... chamber,_ Q₆. _this, ... chamber?_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[1920] _fame_] _same_ Q₅ Q₆ F₃ F₄.

[1921] _Frenchman_] _Frenchmen_ Warburton.

[1922] _on_] Ff. _ore_ Qq.

[1923] _foils,_] Marked with a note of interrogation in Ff.

[1924] _unbated_] Qq. _unbaited_ F₁ F₂. _un-baited_ F₃ F₄. _imbaited_
Theobald conj. (withdrawn). _unrebated_ Becket conj. See note (XXX).

_pass_] F₃ F₄. _passe_ F₁ F₂. _pace_ Qq.

[1925] _that_] Ff. om. Q₂ Q₃. _the_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

_anoint_] _annoiot_ F₂.

[1926] _that but dip_] Q₅ Q₆. _that but dippe_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _I but dipt_
Ff.

[1927] _With ... death._] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

[1928] _if I_] _if't_ Anon. conj.

[1929] _Weigh_] Q₅ Ff Q₆. _Wey_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄.

_convenience_] _conveiance_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

[1930] _us_] _it_ Hanmer.

_shape: if ... fail,_] Pointed substantially as by Rowe. _shape if ...
fayle,_ Qq. _shape, if ... faile;_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _shape if ... fail;_ F₄.

[1931] _look_] _lookt_ F₄.

[1932] _did_] Qq. _should_ Ff.

[1933] _cunnings_] Qq. _commings_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _comings_ F₄.

[1934] _I ha't_] Ff. _I hate_ Q₂ Q₃. _I hav't_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆. _That--_ Rowe.

[1935] _I ha't ... dry_] Arranged as by Johnson. One line in Qq Ff.

[1936] _and dry_] om. Pope, reading _I ha't ... hot_ as one line.

[1937] _As_] _And_ Pope.

_that end_] Qq. _the end_ Ff.

[1938] _prepared_] _prepar'd_ Ff. _prefard_ Q₂ Q₃. _preferd_ Q₄ Q₅.
_prefer'd_ Q₆.

[1939] _nonce_] _once_ Q₄ Q₅.

_sipping_] _tasting_ Q (1676).

[1940] _stuck_] _tucke_ Q₆. _tuck_ Q (1676) and Rowe.

[1941] _But ... noise?_] Qq. Omitted in Ff.

Enter Queen.] As in Qq. After _queen!_ in Ff.

[1942] _How ... queen!_] Ff. Omitted in Qq.

[1943] SCENE X. Pope.

[1944] _they_] Qq. _they'l_ F₁ F₂. _they'll_ F₃ F₄.

[1945] _grows aslant_] _growing o'er_ Q (1676).

_aslant a_] Ff. _ascaunt the_ Qq.

[1946] _hoar_] F₃ F₄. _hore_ F₁ F₂. _horry_ Q₂ Q₃. _hoary_ Q₄. _hoarie_
Q₅ Q₆.

[1947] _There with ... come_] Ff. _Therewith ... make_ Qq. _Near
which ... she did make_ Q (1676).

[1948] _give_] _gave_ F₄.

_name_] _name to_ Rowe.

[1949] _cold_] Ff. _cull-cold_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _culcold_ Q₅ Q₆.

[1950] _There_] Qq Ff. _Then_ Capell.

_coronet_] _cronet_ Q₂ Q₃.

[1951] _silver_] Q₂ Q₃ Ff. _sluer_ Q₄ Q₅. _shiver_ Q₆.

[1952] _her_] Qq. _the_ Ff.

_trophies_] Q₂ Q₃ Ff. _trophæs_ Q₄ Q₅. _tropheys_ Q₆.

[1953] _bore_] _bear_ F₄.

[1954] _snatches_] _remnants_ Q (1676).

_tunes_] (Q₁) Ff. _laudes_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _lauds_ Q₅ Q₆.

[1955] _indued_] F₁ Q₆. _indewed_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _deduced_ F₂ F₃ F₄.
_inured_ Mason conj. _reduced_ Collier MS.

[1956] _their_] _her_ F₁.

[1957] _poor wretch_] _poore wench_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆. _gentle maid_ Q (1676).

_lay_] Qq. _buy,_ F₁. _by,_ F₂ F₃. _by_ F₄.

[1958] _she is drown'd!_] Pope, _she is drownd._ Q₂ Q₃. _is she
drownd._ Q₄. _is she drown'd._ Q₅. _is she drown'd?_ Ff Q₆.

[1959] _of fire_] Ff. _a fire_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _afire_ Q₆.

[1960] _douts_] Knight. _doubts_ F₁. _drownes_ Qq F₂. _drowns_ F₃ F₄.

_Let's_] om. Pope.

[1961] _I had_] _had I_ Pope (ed. 2).




ACT V.


SCENE I. _A churchyard._

              _Enter two_ Clowns, _with spades, &c._[1962]

    _First Clo._ Is she to be buried in Christian burial that[1963][1964]
    wilfully seeks her own salvation?

    _Sec. Clo._ I tell thee she is; and therefore make her[1965][1966]
    grave straight: the crowner hath sat on her, and finds it
    Christian burial.                                                  5

    _First Clo._ How can that be, unless she drowned herself[1963][1967]
    in her own defence?

    _Sec. Clo._ Why, 'tis found so.[1965]

    _First Clo._ It must be 'se offendendo;' it cannot be else.[1968]
    For here lies the point: if I drown myself wittingly, it argues   10
    an act: and an act hath three branches; it is, to act, to[1969]
    do, and to perform: argal, she drowned herself wittingly.[1970]

    _Sec. Clo._ Nay, but hear you, goodman delver.[1971]

    _First Clo._ Give me leave. Here lies the water; good:[1972]
    here stands the man; good: if the man go to this water and[1973]  15
    drown himself, it is, will he, nill he, he goes; mark you[1974]
    that; but if the water come to him and drown him, he[1975]
    drowns not himself: argal, he that is not guilty of his own
    death shortens not his own life.

    _Sec. Clo._ But is this law?                                      20

    _First Clo._ Ay, marry, is't; crowner's quest law.

    _Sec. Clo._ Will you ha' the truth on't? If this had not[1976]
    been a gentlewoman, she should have been buried out o'[1977]
    Christian burial.

    _First Clo._ Why, there thou say'st: and the more pity that[1978]  25
    great folk should have countenance in this world to drown
    or hang themselves, more than their even Christian. Come,[1979]
    my spade. There is no ancient gentlemen but gardeners,[1980]
    ditchers and grave-makers: they hold up Adam's profession.

    _Sec. Clo._ Was he a gentleman?                                   30

    _First Clo._ A' was the first that ever bore arms.[1981]

    _Sec. Clo._ Why, he had none.[1982]

    _First Clo._ What, art a heathen? How dost thou understand[1982][1983]
    the Scripture? The Scripture says Adam digged:[1982]
    could he dig without arms? I'll put another question[1982]        35
    to thee: if thou answerest me not to the purpose, confess[1984]
    thyself--[1985]

    _Sec. Clo._ Go to.

    _First Clo._ What is he that builds stronger than either
    the mason, the shipwright, or the carpenter?                      40

    _Sec. Clo._ The gallows-maker; for that frame outlives a[1986]
    thousand tenants.

    _First Clo._ I like thy wit well, in good faith: the gallows
    does well; but how does it well? it does well to those that
    do ill: now, thou dost ill to say the gallows is built stronger   45
    than the church: argal, the gallows may do well to thee.
    To't again, come.

    _Sec. Clo._ 'Who builds stronger than a mason, a shipwright,
    or a carpenter?'[1987]

    _First Clo._ Ay, tell me that, and unyoke.                        50

    _Sec. Clo._ Marry, now I can tell.

    _First Clo._ To't.

    _Sec. Clo._ Mass, I cannot tell.

            _Enter_ HAMLET _and_ HORATIO, _afar off_.[1988]

    _First Clo._ Cudgel thy brains no more about it, for your
    dull ass will not mend his pace with beating, and when            55
    you are asked this question next, say 'a grave-maker:' the
    houses that he makes last till doomsday. Go, get thee to[1989][1990]
    Yaughan; fetch me a stoup of liquor. [_Exit Sec. Clown._[1990][1991]

                                                  [_He digs, and sings._

                In youth, when I did love, did love,
                  Methought it was very sweet,                        60
                To contract, O, the time, for-a my behove,[1992]
                  O, methought, there-a was nothing-a meet.[1993]

    _Ham._ Has this fellow no feeling of his business, that[1994][1995]
    he sings at grave-making?[1995]

    _Hor._ Custom hath made it in him a property of easiness.[1996]   65

    _Ham._ 'Tis e'en so: the hand of little employment hath
    the daintier sense.[1997]

    _First Clo._ [_Sings_] But age, with his stealing steps,[1998][1999]
                  Hath claw'd me in his clutch,[1999][2000]           70
                And hath shipped me intil the land,[1999][2001]
                  As if I had never been such.[2002]

                                                   [_Throws up a skull._

    _Ham._ That skull had a tongue in it, and could sing
    once: how the knave jowls it to the ground, as if it were[2003]
    Cain's jaw-bone, that did the first murder! It might be[2004]     75
    the pate of a politician, which this ass now o'er-reaches;[2005]
    one that would circumvent God, might it not?[2006]

    _Hor._ It might, my lord.

    _Ham._ Or of a courtier, which could say 'Good morrow,
    sweet lord! How dost thou, sweet lord?' This might[2007]          80
    be my lord such-a-one, that praised my lord such-a-one's[2008]
    horse, when he meant to beg it; might it not?[2009]

    _Hor._ Ay, my lord.

    _Ham._ Why, e'en so: and now my Lady Worm's;[2010]
    chapless, and knocked about the mazzard with a sexton's[2011]     85
    spade: here's fine revolution, an we had the trick to see't.[2012]
    Did these bones cost no more the breeding, but to play at
    loggats with 'em? mine ache to think on't.[2013]

    _First Clo._ [_Sings_] A pick-axe, and a spade, a spade,[1998]
                  For and a shrouding sheet:[2014]                    90
                O, a pit of clay for to be made
                  For such a guest is meet.

                                         [Throws up another skull.[2015]

    _Ham._ There's another: why may not that be the skull[2016]
    of a lawyer? Where be his quiddities now, his quillets, his[2017]
    cases, his tenures, and his tricks? why does he suffer this       95
    rude knave now to knock him about the sconce with a dirty[2018]
    shovel, and will not tell him of his action of battery? Hum![2019]
    This fellow might be in 's time a great buyer of land, with
    his statutes, his recognizances, his fines, his double vouchers,
    his recoveries: is this the fine of his fines and the recovery[2020]  100
    of his recoveries, to have his fine pate full of fine dirt? will[2020][2021]
    his vouchers vouch him no more of his purchases, and double[2022][2023]
    ones too, than the length and breadth of a pair of indentures?[2023]
    The very conveyances of his lands will hardly lie in[2024]
    this box; and must the inheritor himself have no more, ha?       105

    _Hor._ Not a jot more, my lord.

    _Ham._ Is not parchment made of sheep-skins?

    _Hor._ Ay, my lord, and of calf-skins too.[2025]

    _Ham._ They are sheep and calves which seek out assurance[2026]
    in that. I will speak to this fellow. Whose grave's              110
    this, sirrah?[2027]

    _First Clo._ Mine, sir.[2028]
       [_Sings_] O, a pit of clay for to be made[2028][2029]
                  For such a guest is meet.[2030]

    _Ham._ I think it be thine indeed, for thou liest in't.[2031]    115

    _First Clo._ You lie out on't, sir, and therefore 'tis not[2032]
    yours: for my part, I do not lie in't, and yet it is mine.[2033]

    _Ham._ Thou dost lie in't, to be in't and say it is thine:
    'tis for the dead, not for the quick; therefore thou liest.

    _First Clo._ 'Tis a quick lie, sir; 'twill away again, from[2034]  120
    me to you.

    _Ham._ What man dost thou dig it for?

    _First Clo._ For no man, sir.

    _Ham._ What woman then?

    _First Clo._ For none, neither.                                  125

    _Ham._ Who is to be buried in 't?

    _First Clo._ One that was a woman, sir; but, rest her
    soul, she's dead.

    _Ham._ How absolute the knave is! we must speak by
    the card, or equivocation will undo us. By the Lord,[2035]       130
    Horatio, this three years I have taken note of it; the age[2036]
    is grown so picked that the toe of the peasant comes so[2037]
    near the heel of the courtier, he galls his kibe. How long[2038]
    hast thou been a grave-maker?[2039]

    _First Clo._ Of all the days i' the year, I came to't that[2040]  135
    day that our last king Hamlet o'ercame Fortinbras.[2041]

    _Ham._ How long is that since?

    _First Clo._ Cannot you tell that? every fool can tell
    that: it was that very day that young Hamlet was born;[2042]
    he that is mad, and sent into England.[2043]                     140

    _Ham._ Ay, marry, why was he sent into England?

    _First Clo._ Why, because a' was mad: a' shall recover[2044]
    his wits there; or, if a' do not, 'tis no great matter there.[2044][2045]

    _Ham._ Why?

    _First Clo._ 'Twill not be seen in him there; there the[2046]    145
    men are as mad as he.[2046]

    _Ham._ How came he mad?

    _First Clo._ Very strangely, they say.

    _Ham._ How 'strangely'?

    _First Clo._ Faith, e'en with losing his wits.                   150

    _Ham._ Upon what ground?

    _First Clo._ Why, here in Denmark: I have been sexton[2047]
    here, man and boy, thirty years.[2048]

    _Ham._ How long will a man lie i' the earth ere he rot?

    _First Clo._ I'faith, if a' be not rotten before a' die--as[2049][2050]  155
    we have many pocky corses now-a-days, that will scarce[2051]
    hold the laying in--a' will last you some eight year or nine[2051]
    year: a tanner will last you nine year.[2052]

    _Ham._ Why he more than another?

    _First Clo._ Why, sir, his hide is so tanned with his trade[2053]  160
    that a' will keep out water a great while; and your water is[2054]
    a sore decayer of your whoreson dead body. Here's a skull[2055]
    now: this skull has lain in the earth three and twenty years.[2055][2056]

    _Ham._ Whose was it?

    _First Clo._ A whoreson mad fellow's it was: whose do[2057]      165
    you think it was?[2057]

    _Ham._ Nay, I know not.

    _First Clo._ A pestilence on him for a mad rogue! a'[2058]
    poured a flagon of Rhenish on my head once. This same[2059]
    skull, sir, was Yorick's skull, the king's jester.[2059][2060]   170

    _Ham._ This?

    _First Clo._ E'en that.

    _Ham._ Let me see. [_Takes the skull._] Alas, poor[2061]
    Yorick! I knew him, Horatio: a fellow of infinite jest, of
    most excellent fancy: he hath borne me on his back a[2062]       175
    thousand times; and now how abhorred in my imagination[2063][2064]
    it is! my gorge rises at it. Here hung those lips that I[2064]
    have kissed I know not how oft. Where be your gibes
    now? your gambols? your songs? your flashes of merriment,[2065]
    that were wont to set the table on a roar? Not one[2066]         180
    now, to mock your own grinning? quite chop-fallen? Now[2067]
    get you to my lady's chamber, and tell her, let her paint[2068]
    an inch thick, to this favour she must come; make her[2069]
    laugh at that. Prithee, Horatio, tell me one thing.

    _Hor._ What's that, my lord?                                     185

    _Ham._ Dost thou think Alexander looked o' this fashion[2070]
    i' the earth?

    _Hor._ E'en so.

    _Ham._ And smelt so? pah!              [_Puts down the skull._[2071]

    _Hor._ E'en so, my lord.                                         190

    _Ham._ To what base uses we may return, Horatio![2072]
    Why may not imagination trace the noble dust of Alexander,
    till he find it stopping a bung-hole?[2073]

    _Hor._ 'Twere to consider too curiously, to consider so.

    _Ham._ No, faith, not a jot; but to follow him thither[2074]     195
    with modesty enough and likelihood to lead it: as thus:[2075]
    Alexander died, Alexander was buried, Alexander returneth[2076]
    into dust; the dust is earth; of earth we make loam;[2077]
    and why of that loam, whereto he was converted, might[2078]
    they not stop a beer-barrel?                                     200
          Imperious Cæsar, dead and turn'd to clay,[2079]
          Might stop a hole to keep the wind away:
          O, that that earth, which kept the world in awe,
          Should patch a wall to expel the winter's flaw![2080]
    But soft! but soft! aside: here comes the king.                  205

  _Enter_ Priests, _&c. in procession; the Corpse of Ophelia_, LAERTES
   _and_ Mourners _following_; KING, QUEEN, _their trains, &c._[2081]

    The queen, the courtiers: who is this they follow?[2082]
    And with such maimed rites? This doth betoken[2083]
    The corse they follow did with desperate hand
    Fordo its own life: 'twas of some estate.[2084]
    Couch we awhile, and mark.      [_Retiring with Horatio._[2085]  210

    _Laer._ What ceremony else?[2086]

    _Ham._ That is Laertes, a very noble youth: mark.[2087]

    _Laer._ What ceremony else?

    _First Priest._ Her obsequies have been as far enlarged[2088][2089]
    As we have warranty: her death was doubtful;[2090]               215
    And, but that great command o'ersways the order,
    She should in ground unsanctified have lodged[2091]
    Till the last trumpet; for charitable prayers,[2092]
    Shards, flints and pebbles should be thrown on her:[2093]
    Yet here she is allow'd her virgin crants,[2094]                 220
    Her maiden strewments and the bringing home[2095]
    Of bell and burial.

    _Laer._ Must there no more be done?[2096]

    _First Priest._                     No more be done:[2088]
    We should profane the service of the dead
    To sing a requiem and such rest to her[2097]                     225
    As to peace-parted souls.

    _Laer._                   Lay her i' the earth:[2098]
    And from her fair and unpolluted flesh
    May violets spring! I tell thee, churlish priest,
    A ministering angel shall my sister be,
    When thou liest howling.

    _Ham._                   What, the fair Ophelia!                 230

    _Queen._ [_Scattering flowers_] Sweets to the sweet: farewell![2099]
    I hoped thou shouldst have been my Hamlet's wife;[2100]
    I thought thy bride-bed to have deck'd, sweet maid,
    And not have strew'd thy grave.

    _Laer._                         O, treble woe[2101]
    Fall ten times treble on that cursed head[2102]                  235
    Whose wicked deed thy most ingenious sense[2103]
    Deprived thee of! Hold off the earth awhile,
    Till I have caught her once more in mine arms:

                                          [_Leaps into the grave._[2104]

    Now pile your dust upon the quick and dead,
    Till of this flat a mountain you have made                       240
    To o'ertop old Pelion or the skyish head[2105]
    Of blue Olympus.[2106][2107]

    _Ham._ [_Advancing_] What is he whose grief[2107]
    Bears such an emphasis? whose phrase of sorrow[2108]
    Conjures the wandering stars and makes them stand
    Like wonder-wounded hearers? This is I,[2109]                    245
    Hamlet the Dane.                            [_Leaps into the grave._

    _Laer._          The devil take thy soul!

                                            [_Grappling with him._[2110]

    _Ham._ Thou pray'st not well.[2111]
    I prithee, take thy fingers from my throat;[2111]
    For, though I am not splenitive and rash,[2112]
    Yet have I in me something dangerous,[2113]                      250
    Which let thy wisdom fear. Hold off thy hand.[2114]

    _King._ Pluck them asunder.

    _Queen._                    Hamlet, Hamlet!

    _All._                                      Gentlemen,--

    _Hor._ Good my lord, be quiet.

      [_The Attendants part them, and they come out of the grave._[2115]

    _Ham._ Why, I will fight with him upon this theme[2116]
    Until my eyelids will no longer wag.                             255

    _Queen._ O my son, what theme?

    _Ham._ I loved Ophelia: forty thousand brothers
    Could not, with all their quantity of love,[2117]
    Make up my sum. What wilt thou do for her?

    _King._ O, he is mad, Laertes.                                   260

    _Queen._ For love of God, forbear him.

    _Ham._ 'Swounds, show me what thou'lt do:[2118]
    Woo't weep? woo't fight? woo't fast? woo't tear thyself?[2119][2120]
    Woo't drink up eisel? eat a crocodile?[2119][2121]
    I'll do't. Dost thou come here to whine?[2122]                   265
    To outface me with leaping in her grave?[2123]
    Be buried quick with her, and so will I:
    And, if thou prate of mountains, let them throw
    Millions of acres on us, till our ground,
    Singeing his pate against the burning zone,[2124]                270
    Make Ossa like a wart! Nay, an thou'lt mouth,[2125]
    I'll rant as well as thou.

    _Queen._                   This is mere madness:[2126][2127]
    And thus awhile the fit will work on him;[2128]
    Anon, as patient as the female dove[2127][2129]
    When that her golden couplets are disclosed,[2130]               275
    His silence will sit drooping.

    _Ham._                         Hear you, sir;
    What is the reason that you use me thus?
    I loved you ever: but it is no matter;[2131]
    Let Hercules himself do what he may,
    The cat will mew, and dog will have his day.     [_Exit._[2132]  280
    King. I pray thee, good Horatio, wait upon him.

                                                  [_Exit Horatio._[2133]

    [_To Laertes_] Strengthen your patience in our last night's speech;[2134]
    We'll put the matter to the present push.
    Good Gertrude, set some watch over your son.
    This grave shall have a living monument:                         285
    An hour of quiet shortly shall we see;[2135]
    Till then, in patience our proceeding be.           [_Exeunt._[2136]


SCENE II. _A hall in the castle._[2137]

                     _Enter_ HAMLET _and_ HORATIO.

    _Ham._ So much for this, sir: now shall you see the other;[2138]
    You do remember all the circumstance?[2139]

    _Hor._ Remember it, my lord!

    _Ham._ Sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting,
    That would not let me sleep: methought I lay[2140]                 5
    Worse than the mutines in the bilboes. Rashly,[2141][2142]
    And praised be rashness for it, let us know,[2142][2143][2144][2145]
    Our indiscretion sometime serves us well[2144][2145][2146]
    When our deep plots do pall; and that should learn us[2144][2147]
    There's a divinity that shapes our ends,[2144]                    10
    Rough-hew them how we will.[2144]

    _Hor._                      That is most certain.

    _Ham._ Up from my cabin,
    My sea-gown scarf'd about me, in the dark[2148]
    Groped I to find out them; had my desire,[2149]
    Finger'd their packet, and in fine withdrew                       15
    To mine own room again; making so bold,[2150][2151]
    My fears forgetting manners, to unseal[2151][2152]
    Their grand commission; where I found, Horatio,--
    O royal knavery!--an exact command,[2153]
    Larded with many several sorts of reasons,[2154]                  20
    Importing Denmark's health and England's too,
    With, ho! such bugs and goblins in my life,[2155]
    That, on the supervise, no leisure bated,
    No, not to stay the grinding of the axe,[2156]
    My head should be struck off.[2157]

    _Hor._                        Is't possible?                      25

    _Ham._ Here's the commission: read it at more leisure.
    But wilt thou hear now how I did proceed?[2158]

    _Hor._ I beseech you.[2159]

    _Ham._ Being thus be-netted round with villanies,--[2160][2161]
    Or I could make a prologue to my brains,[2160][2162]              30
    They had begun the play,--I sat me down;[2160][2163]
    Devised a new commission; wrote it fair:
    I once did hold it, as our statists do,
    A baseness to write fair, and labour'd much[2164]
    How to forget that learning; but, sir, now                        35
    It did me yeoman's service: wilt thou know[2165]
    The effect of what I wrote?[2166]

    _Hor._                      Ay, good my lord.

    _Ham._ An earnest conjuration from the king,
    As England was his faithful tributary,
    As love between them like the palm might flourish,[2167]          40
    As peace should still her wheaten garland wear
    And stand a comma 'tween their amities,[2168]
    And many such-like 'As'es of great charge,[2169]
    That, on the view and knowing of these contents,[2170]
    Without debatement further, more or less,                         45
    He should the bearers put to sudden death,[2171]
    Not shriving-time allow'd.[2172]

    _Hor._                     How was this seal'd?

    _Ham._ Why, even in that was heaven ordinant.[2173]
    I had my father's signet in my purse,
    Which was the model of that Danish seal:                          50
    Folded the writ up in the form of the other;[2174]
    Subscribed it; gave't the impression; placed it safely,[2175]
    The changeling never known. Now, the next day[2176]
    Was our sea-fight; and what to this was sequent[2177]
    Thou know'st already.[2178]                                       55

    _Hor._ So Guildenstern and Rosencrantz go to't.[2179]

    _Ham._ Why, man, they did make love to this employment;[2180]
    They are not near my conscience; their defeat[2181]
    Does by their own insinuation grow:[2182]
    'Tis dangerous when the baser nature comes[2183]                  60
    Between the pass and fell incensed points[2184]
    Of mighty opposites.

    _Hor._               Why, what a king is this!

    _Ham._ Does it not, thinks't thee, stand me now upon--[2185]
    He that hath kill'd my king, and whored my mother;[2186]
    Popp'd in between the election and my hopes;[2187]                65
    Thrown out his angle for my proper life,[2188]
    And with such cozenage--is't not perfect conscience,[2189]
    To quit him with this arm? and is't not to be damn'd,[2190][2191]
    To let this canker of our nature come[2190]
    In further evil?[2190][2192]                                      70

    _Hor._ It must be shortly known to him from England[2190]
    What is the issue of the business there.[2190]

    _Ham._ It will be short: the interim is mine;[2190][2193][2194]
    And a man's life's no more than to say 'One.'[2190][2193][2195]
    But I am very sorry, good Horatio,[2190][2193]                    75
    That to Laertes I forgot myself;[2190]
    For, by the image of my cause, I see[2190]
    The portraiture of his: I'll court his favours:[2190][2196]
    But, sure, the bravery of his grief did put me[2190]
    Into a towering passion.[2190]

    _Hor._                   Peace! who comes here?[2190][2197]       80

                             _Enter_ OSRIC.

    _Osr._ Your lordship is right welcome back to Denmark.[2198][2199]

    _Ham._ I humbly thank you, sir. Dost know this water-fly?[2200][2201]

    _Hor._ No, my good lord.[2201]

    _Ham._ Thy state is the more gracious, for 'tis a vice to[2201]
    know him. He hath much land, and fertile: let a beast be[2201]    85
    lord of beasts, and his crib shall stand at the king's mess:[2201]
    'tis a chough, but, as I say, spacious in the possession of
        dirt.[2201][2202]

    _Osr._ Sweet lord, if your lordship were at leisure, I[2203]
    should impart a thing to you from his majesty.

    _Ham._ I will receive it, sir, with all diligence of spirit.[2204]  90
    Put your bonnet to his right use; 'tis for the head.[2205]

    _Osr._ I thank your lordship, it is very hot.[2206]

    _Ham._ No, believe me, 'tis very cold; the wind is
    northerly.

    _Osr._ It is indifferent cold, my lord, indeed.                   95

    _Ham._ But yet methinks it is very sultry and hot, or my[2207][2208]
    complexion--[2208]

    _Osr._ Exceedingly, my lord; it is very sultry, as 'twere,--I[2209]
    cannot tell how. But, my lord, his majesty bade me[2210]
    signify to you that he has laid a great wager on your head:[2211]  100
    sir, this is the matter--[2212]

    _Ham._ I beseech you, remember--[2213]

                                  [_Hamlet moves him to put on his hat._

    _Osr._ Nay, good my lord; for mine ease, in good faith.[2214]
    Sir, here is newly come to court Laertes; believe me, an absolute[2215]
    gentleman, full of most excellent differences, of very[2215][2216]  105
    soft society and great showing: indeed, to speak feelingly of[2215][2217]
    him, he is the card or calendar of gentry, for you shall find[2215][2218]
    in him the continent of what part a gentleman would see.[2215][2219]

    _Ham._ Sir, his definement suffers no perdition in you;[2215]
    though, I know, to divide him inventorially would dizzy the[2215][2220]  110
    arithmetic of memory, and yet but yaw neither, in respect[2215][2221]
    of his quick sail. But in the verity of extolment, I take[2215]
    him to be a soul of great article, and his infusion of such[2215][2222]
    dearth and rareness, as, to make true diction of him, his[2215]
    semblable is his mirror, and who else would trace him, his[2215]  115
    umbrage, nothing more.[2215]

    _Osr._ Your lordship speaks most infallibly of him.[2215]

    _Ham._ The concernancy, sir? why do we wrap the[2215][2223]
    gentleman in our more rawer breath?[2215]

    _Osr._ Sir?[2215][2224]                                          120

    _Hor._ Is't not possible to understand in another tongue?[2215][2225]
    You will do't, sir, really.[2215][2226]

    _Ham._ What imports the nomination of this gentleman?[2215]

    _Osr._ Of Laertes?[2215][2227]

    _Hor._ His purse is empty already; all's golden words[2215]      125
    are spent.[2215]

    _Ham._ Of him, sir.[2215][2228]

    _Osr._ I know you are not ignorant--[2215][2229]

    _Ham._ I would you did, sir; yet, in faith, if you did, it[2215]
    would not much approve me. Well, sir?[2215][2230]                130

    _Osr._ You are not ignorant of what excellence Laertes is--[2215][2231]

    _Ham._ I dare not confess that, lest I should compare[2215]
    with him in excellence; but, to know a man well, were to[2215][2232]
    know himself.[2215]

    _Osr._ I mean, sir, for his weapon; but in the imputation[2215][2233]  135
    laid on him by them, in his meed he's unfellowed.[2215][2234]

    _Ham._ What's his weapon?

    _Osr._ Rapier and dagger.

    _Ham._ That's two of his weapons: but, well.

    _Osr._ The king, sir, hath wagered with him six Barbary[2235]    140
    horses: against the which he has imponed, as I take it, six[2236]
    French rapiers and poniards, with their assigns, as girdle,
    hanger, and so: three of the carriages, in faith, are very[2237]
    dear to fancy, very responsive to the hilts, most delicate
    carriages, and of very liberal conceit.                          145

    _Ham._ What call you the carriages?

    _Hor._ I knew you must be edified by the margent ere[2238]
    you had done.[2238]

    _Osr._ The carriages, sir, are the hangers.[2239]

    _Ham._ The phrase would be more germane to the[2240]             150
    matter if we could carry a cannon by our sides: I would[2241]
    it might be hangers till then. But, on: six Barbary horses[2242]
    against six French swords, their assigns, and three liberal-conceited
    carriages; that's the French bet against the[2243][2244]
    Danish. Why is this 'imponed,' as you call it?[2244][2245]       155

    _Osr._ The king, sir, hath laid, sir, that in a dozen[2246]
    passes between yourself and him, he shall not exceed you[2247]
    three hits: he hath laid on twelve for nine; and it would[2248]
    come to immediate trial, if your lordship would vouchsafe
    the answer.                                                      160

    _Ham._  How if I answer 'no'?

    _Osr._ I mean, my lord, the opposition of your person
    in trial.

    _Ham._  Sir, I will walk here in the hall: if it please his[2249]
    majesty, it is the breathing time of day with me; let the[2249][2250]  165
    foils be brought, the gentleman willing, and the king hold[2251]
    his purpose, I will win for him an I can; if not, I will gain[2252]
    nothing but my shame and the odd hits.

    _Osr._  Shall I redeliver you e'en so?[2253]

    _Ham._  To this effect, sir, after what flourish your nature[2254]  170
    will.

    _Osr._ I commend my duty to your lordship.[2255]

    _Ham._ Yours, yours. [_Exit Osric._] He does well to[2256]
    commend it himself; there are no tongues else for's turn.[2257]

    _Hor._ This lapwing runs away with the shell on his[2258]        175
    head.

    _Ham._ He did comply with his dug before he sucked[2259]
    it. Thus has he--and many more of the same breed that[2260]
    I know the drossy age dotes on--only got the tune of the
    time and outward habit of encounter; a kind of yesty[2261][2262]  180
    collection, which carries them through and through the most[2261]
    fond and winnowed opinions; and do but blow them to[2263]
    their trial, the bubbles are out.[2264]

                         _Enter a_ Lord.[2265]

    _Lord._ My lord, his majesty commended him to you by[2265]
    young Osric, who brings back to him, that you attend him[2265][2266]  185
    in the hall: he sends to know if your pleasure hold to play[2265]
    with Laertes, or that you will take longer time.[2265]

    _Ham._ I am constant to my purposes; they follow the[2265]
    king's pleasure: if his fitness speaks, mine is ready; now or[2265]
    whensoever, provided I be so able as now.[2265]                  190

    _Lord._ The king and queen and all are coming down.[2265]

    _Ham._ In happy time.[2265]

    _Lord._ The queen desires you to use some gentle entertainment[2265][2267]
    to Laertes before you fall to play.[2265][2268]

    _Ham._ She well instructs me.        [_Exit Lord._[2265][2269]   195

    _Hor._ You will lose this wager, my lord.[2270]

    _Ham._ I do not think so; since he went into France, I
    have been in continual practice; I shall win at the odds.
    But thou wouldst not think how ill all's here about my[2271]
    heart: but it is no matter.                                      200

    _Hor._ Nay, good my lord,--[2272]

    _Ham._ It is but foolery; but it is such a kind of gain-giving[2273]
    as would perhaps trouble a woman.[2273]

    _Hor._ If your mind dislike any thing, obey it. I will[2274]
    forestal their repair hither, and say you are not fit.           205

    _Ham._ Not a whit; we defy augury: there is special[2275]
    providence in the fall of a sparrow. If it be now, 'tis not to[2276]
    come; if it be not to come, it will be now; if it be not now,
    yet it will come: the readiness is all; since no man has[2277][2278]
    aught of what he leaves, what is't to leave betimes? Let         210
    be.[2278]

_Enter_ KING, QUEEN, LAERTES, _and_ Lords, OSRIC _and other_ Attendants
  _with foils and gauntlets; a table and flagons of wine on it_.[2279]

    _King._ Come, Hamlet, come, and take this hand from me.[2280]

                           [_The King puts Laertes' hand into Hamlet's._

    _Ham._ Give me your pardon, sir: I've done you wrong;[2281]
    But pardon't, as you are a gentleman.[2282]
    This presence knows,[2282][2283][2284]                           215
    And you must needs have heard, how I am punish'd[2283][2284][2285]
    With sore distraction. What I have done,[2283][2284][2286]
    That might your nature, honour and exception[2284][2287]
    Roughly awake, I here proclaim was madness.[2284]
    Was't Hamlet wrong'd Laertes? Never Hamlet:[2284]                220
    If Hamlet from himself be ta'en away,[2284]
    And when he's not himself does wrong Laertes,[2284]
    Then Hamlet does it not, Hamlet denies it.[2284]
    Who does it then? His madness: if't be so,[2284][2288]
    Hamlet is of the faction that is wrong'd;[2284][2289]            225
    His madness is poor Hamlet's enemy.[2284]
    Sir, in this audience,[2284][2290]
    Let my disclaiming from a purposed evil
    Free me so far in your most generous thoughts,
    That I have shot mine arrow o'er the house,[2291]                230
    And hurt my brother.[2292]

    _Laer._              I am satisfied in nature,
    Whose motive, in this case, should stir me most
    To my revenge: but in my terms of honour
    I stand aloof, and will no reconcilement,
    Till by some elder masters of known honour[2293]                 235
    I have a voice and precedent of peace,[2294]
    To keep my name ungored. But till that time[2295]
    I do receive your offer'd love like love[2296]
    And will not wrong it.

    _Ham._                 I embrace it freely,[2297][2298]
    And will this brother's wager frankly play.[2298]                240
    Give us the foils. Come on.[2299]

    _Laer._                     Come, one for me.

    _Ham._ I'll be your foil, Laertes: in mine ignorance
    Your skill shall, like a star i' the darkest night,[2300]
    Stick fiery off indeed.[2301]

    _Laer._                 You mock me, sir.

    _Ham._ No, by this hand.[2302]                                   245

    _King._ Give them the foils, young Osric. Cousin[2303][2304]
    Hamlet,[2303]
    You know the wager?

    _Ham._              Very well, my lord;[2305][2306]
    Your grace has laid the odds o' the weaker side.[2306][2307]

    _King._ I do not fear it; I have seen you both:[2308]
    But since he is better'd, we have therefore odds.[2309]          250

    _Laer._ This is too heavy; let me see another.[2310][2311]

    _Ham._ This likes me well. These foils have all a length?[2310][2312]

                                                [_They prepare to play._

    _Osr._ Ay, my good lord.

    _King._ Set me the stoups of wine upon that table.[2313]
    If Hamlet give the first or second hit,[2314]                    255
    Or quit in answer of the third exchange,[2315]
    Let all the battlements their ordnance fire;
    The king shall drink to Hamlet's better breath;
    And in the cup an union shall he throw,[2316]
    Richer than that which four successive kings                     260
    In Denmark's crown have worn. Give me the cups;[2317]
    And let the kettle to the trumpet speak,[2318]
    The trumpet to the cannoneer without,[2319]
    The cannons to the heavens, the heaven to earth,[2320]
    'Now the king drinks to Hamlet.' Come, begin;[2321]              265
    And you, the judges, bear a wary eye.

    _Ham._ Come on, sir.

    _Laer._              Come, my lord.              [_They play._[2322]

    _Ham._                              One.

    _Laer._                                  No.

    _Ham._                                       Judgement.

    _Osr._ A hit, a very palpable hit.[2323]

    _Laer._                            Well; again.

    _King._ Stay; give me drink. Hamlet, this pearl is thine;[2324]
    Here's to thy health.

                    [_Trumpets sound, and cannon shot off within._[2325]

                      Give him the cup.                              270

    _Ham._ I'll play this bout first; set it by awhile.[2326]
    Come. [_They play._]  Another hit; what say you?[2327]

    _Laer._ A touch, a touch, I do confess.[2328]

    _King._ Our son shall win.

    _Queen._                   He's fat and scant of breath.[2329]
    Here, Hamlet, take my napkin, rub thy brows:[2330]               275
    The queen carouses to thy fortune, Hamlet.

    _Ham._ Good madam!

    _King._            Gertrude, do not drink.[2331]

    _Queen._ I will, my lord; I pray you, pardon me.[2332]

    _King._ [_Aside_] It is the poison'd cup; it is too late.[2333]

    _Ham._ I dare not drink yet, madam; by and by.[2334]             280

    _Queen._ Come, let me wipe thy face.

    _Laer._ My lord, I'll hit him now.[2335]

    _King._                            I do not think't.

    _Laer._ [_Aside_] And yet it is almost against my conscience.[2333][2336]

    _Ham._ Come, for the third, Laertes: you but dally;[2337]
    I pray you, pass with your best violence;                        285
    I am afeard you make a wanton of me.[2338]

    _Laer._ Say you so? come on.                     [_They play._[2339]

    _Osr._ Nothing, neither way.

    _Laer._ Have at you now!

                     [_Laertes wounds Hamlet; then, in scuffling, they
                      change rapiers, and Hamlet wounds Laertes._[2340]

    _King._                  Part them; they are incensed.

    _Ham._ Nay, come, again.                         [_The Queen falls._

    _Osr._                   Look to the queen there, ho![2341]      290

    _Hor._ They bleed on both sides. How is it, my lord?[2342]

    _Osr._ How is't, Laertes?[2343]

    _Laer._ Why, as a woodcock to mine own springe, Osric;[2344]
    I am justly kill'd with mine own treachery.[2345]

    _Ham._ How does the queen?

    _King._                    She swounds to see them bleed.[2346]  295

    _Queen._ No, no, the drink, the drink,--O my dear Hamlet,--[2347]
    The drink, the drink! I am poison'd.            [_Dies._[2347][2348]

    _Ham._ O villany! Ho! let the door be lock'd:[2349]
    Treachery! seek it out.

    _Laer._ It is here, Hamlet: Hamlet, thou art slain;[2350]        300
    No medicine in the world can do thee good,[2351]
    In thee there is not half an hour of life;[2352]
    The treacherous instrument is in thy hand,[2353]
    Unbated and envenom'd: the foul practice[2354]
    Hath turn'd itself on me; lo, here I lie,[2355]                  305
    Never to rise again: thy mother's poison'd:[2356]
    I can no more: the king, the king's to blame.[2357]

    _Ham._ The point envenom'd too![2358][2359][2360]
    Then, venom, to thy work.       [_Stabs the King._[2358][2360][2361]

    _All._ Treason! treason!                                         310

    _King._ O, yet defend me, friends; I am but hurt.

    _Ham._ Here, thou incestuous, murderous, damned Dane,[2362]
    Drink off this potion: is thy union here?[2363]
    Follow my mother.                                [_King dies._[2364]

    _Laer._           He is justly served;[2365]
    It is a poison temper'd by himself.[2365][2366]                  315
    Exchange forgiveness with me, noble Hamlet:
    Mine and my father's death come not upon thee,[2367]
    Nor thine on me!                                      [_Dies._[2368]

    _Ham._ Heaven make thee free of it! I follow thee.[2369]
    I am dead, Horatio. Wretched queen, adieu![2370]                 320
    You that look pale and tremble at this chance,
    That are but mutes or audience to this act,[2371]
    Had I but time--as this fell sergeant, death,[2372]
    Is strict in his arrest--O, I could tell you--[2372][2373]
    But let it be. Horatio, I am dead;                               325
    Thou livest; report me and my cause aright[2374]
    To the unsatisfied.

    _Hor._              Never believe it:[2375]
    I am more an antique Roman than a Dane:[2376]
    Here's yet some liquor left.

    _Ham._                       As thou'rt a man,[2377][2378]
    Give me the cup: let go; by heaven, I'll have't.[2377][2379]     330
    O good Horatio, what a wounded name,[2380]
    Things standing thus unknown, shall live behind me![2381]
    If thou didst ever hold me in thy heart,
    Absent thee from felicity awhile,[2382]
    And in this harsh world draw thy breath in pain,                 335
    To tell my story.          [_March afar off, and shot within._[2383]
                      What warlike noise is this?

    _Osr._ Young Fortinbras, with conquest come from Poland,[2384]
    To the ambassadors of England gives[2385][2386][2387]
    This warlike volley.[2386]

    _Ham._               O, I die, Horatio;
    The potent poison quite o'er-crows my spirit:[2388]              340
    I cannot live to hear the news from England;
    But I do prophesy the election lights
    On Fortinbras: he has my dying voice;
    So tell him, with the occurrents, more and less,[2389]
    Which have solicited. The rest is silence.      [_Dies._[2390]   345

    _Hor._ Now cracks a noble heart. Good night, sweet prince,[2391]
    And flights of angels sing thee to thy rest!  [_March within._[2392]
    Why does the drum come hither?

     _Enter_ FORTINBRAS, _and the_ English Ambassadors, _with drum,
                    colours, and_ Attendants.[2393]

    _Fort._ Where is this sight?

    _Hor._                       What is it you would see?[2394]
    If aught of woe or wonder, cease your search.[2395]              350

    _Fort._ This quarry cries on havoc. O proud death,[2396]
    What feast is toward in thine eternal cell,[2397]
    That thou so many princes at a shot[2398]
    So bloodily hast struck?

    _First Amb._             The sight is dismal;[2399]
    And our affairs from England come too late:                      355
    The ears are senseless that should give us hearing.
    To tell him his commandment is fulfill'd,
    That Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are dead:
    Where should we have our thanks?

    _Hor._                           Not from his mouth
    Had it the ability of life to thank you:[2400]                   360
    He never gave commandment for their death.[2401]
    But since, so jump upon this bloody question,[2402]
    You from the Polack wars, and you from England,[2403]
    Are here arrived, give order that these bodies
    High on a stage be placed to the view;[2404]                     365
    And let me speak to the yet unknowing world[2405]
    How these things came about: so shall you hear
    Of carnal, bloody and unnatural acts,[2406]
    Of accidental judgements, casual slaughters,
    Of deaths put on by cunning and forced cause,[2407]              370
    And, in this upshot, purposes mistook
    Fall'n on the inventors' heads: all this can I
    Truly deliver.

    _Fort._        Let us haste to hear it,
    And call the noblest to the audience.[2408]
    For me, with sorrow I embrace my fortune:                        375
    I have some rights of memory in this kingdom,[2409]
    Which now to claim my vantage doth invite me.[2410]

    _Hor._ Of that I shall have also cause to speak,[2411]
    And from his mouth whose voice will draw on more:[2412]
    But let this same be presently perform'd,[2413]                  380
    Even while men's minds are wild; lest more mischance[2414]
    On plots and errors happen.[2415]

    _Fort._                     Let four captains
    Bear Hamlet, like a soldier, to the stage;[2416]
    For he was likely, had he been put on,
    To have proved most royally: and, for his passage,[2417]         385
    The soldiers' music and the rites of war[2418]
    Speak loudly for him.
    Take up the bodies: such a sight as this[2419]
    Becomes the field, but here shows much amiss.[2420]
    Go, bid the soldiers shoot.                                      390

                       [_A dead march. Exeunt, bearing off the bodies:
                     after which a peal of ordnance is shot off._[2421]

FOOTNOTES:

[1962] ACT V. SCENE I.] Q (1676) and Rowe. om. Ff.

A churchyard.] Capell. A Church. Rowe.

Enter ...] Enter ... spades and mattocks. Q (1676) and Rowe. Enter two
Clownes. Qq Ff (Clowns. F₃ F₄).

[1963] First Clo.] 1 Clown. Rowe. Clowne, or Clown, or Clow. or Clo. Qq
Ff.

[1964] _that_] Ff. _when she_ Qq.

[1965] Sec. Clo.] 2 Clown. Rowe. Other, or Othe. or Oth. Qq. Other. Ff.

[1966] _and_] Ff. om. Qq.

[1967] _she_] _he_ Q₆.

[1968] _se offendendo_] Ff (in italics). _so offended_ Qq.

[1969] _to act_] Qq. _an act_ Ff.

[1970] _and to perform: argal,_] _and to performe; argall_ Ff
(_perform_ F₃ F₄). _to performe, or all;_ Qq.

[1971] _hear_] _here_ F₂.

_delver_] Qq. _Delver_ F₁ F₂. _Delver_ (in italics) F₃ F₄.

[1972] _Here_] _Clown, here_ Johnson.

[1973] _this_] _his_ F₃.

[1974] _himself_] _himsele_ F₁.

[1975] _that;_] _that:_ Q₆. _that,_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _that?_ Ff.

[1976] _ha'_] F₃ F₄. _ha_ The rest, _have_ Q (1676).

_on't_] Ff. _an't_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _ant't_ Q₆.

[1977] _out o'_] Edd. (Globe ed.) _out a_ Qq. _out of_ Ff. _without_ Q
(1676).

[1978] _say'st:_] _say'st true:_ S. Walker conj. _say'st sooth:_ or
_say'st somewhat:_ Anon. conj.

[1979] _their even Christian_] Ff. _theyr even Christen_ Qq. _we_
Q(1676). _other Christians_ Rowe.

[1980] _spade._] _spade._ [strips, and falls to digging. Capell.

[1981] _A'_] _A_ Qq. _He_ Ff.

[1982] Sec. Clo. _Why ... arms?_] Omitted in Qq.

[1983] _a heathen_] _heathen_ Capell conj.

[1984] _not_] om. Warburton.

[1985] _thyself--_] _thy selfe--_ F₁ F₂. _thy self--_ F₃ F₄. _thy
selfe._ Qq.

[1986] _frame_] Ff. om. Qq.

[1987] _carpenter?_] Ff Q₆. _carpenter._ The rest.

[1988] Enter ...] Ff. Enter Hamlet and Horatio. Qq, after line 62.

[1989] _that_] Ff. om. Qq.

_last_] Q₄ Q₅ Q₆ F₄. _lasts_ Q₂ Q₃ F₁ F₂ F₃.

_till_] _tell_ Q₄. _tel_ Q₅.

[1990] _to Yaughan_] Ff (_Yaughan_ in italics). _in, and_ Qq. _to
Youghan_ Rowe (ed. 2). _to Yaughan's_ Capell conj. _to Vaughan_ Singer
(ed. 1). _to tavern_ Grant White conj. _to Johan_ Anon. conj. (N. and
Q.) _to yᵉ ale and_ Anon. conj. _to yon_ Collier (Collier MS.) See note
(XXXI).

[1991] _stoup_] F₄. _stope_ (Q₁). _stoupe_ F₁. _stoape_ F₂. _stoap_ F₃.
_soope_ Qq.

[Exit Sec. Clown.] Exit 2 Clown. Rowe. om. Qq Ff.

[He digs, and sings.] Rowe. Song. Qq. Sings. Ff.

[1992] _contract, O,_] _contract-a_ Anon. conj.

_time_] om. F₂ F₃ F₄.

_for-a_] _for a_ Qq Ff. _for, ah,_ Capell. _for aye_ Mason conj.

[1993] _there-a was nothing-a_] _there a was nothing a_ Qq. _there was
nothing_ Ff. _there was nothing so_ Hanmer.

[1994] _of_] _in_ Q (1676).

[1995] _that he sings at_] Ff. _a sings in_ Qq. _he sings in Q_ (1676)
and Capell. _he sings at_ Steevens (1778).

[1996] _in him_] _to him_ Pope (ed. 2).

[1997] _daintier_] _dintier_ Q₂ Q₃.

[1998] [Sings] Clowne sings. Ff. Song. Qq.

[1999] _steps ... shipped me intil the_] _steps ... into his band_
Johnson conj. _sand ... shifted me into his_ Jennens conj.

[2000] _claw'd_] Pope. _clawed_ Qq. _caught_ Ff.

[2001] _hath_] om. Capell.

_intil_] _intill_ Ff. _into_ Qq.

_the land_] _his land_ Hanmer.

[2002] _had never_] _never had_ F₃ F₄. _ne'er had_ Pope.

[Throws up a skull.] Capell. om. Qq Ff.

[2003] _it were_] Ff. _twere_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _t'were_ Q₅. _'twere_ Q₆.

[2004] _It might_] Ff. _This might_ Qq.

[2005] _now o'er-reaches_] _now ore-reaches_ Qq. _o're Offices_ F₁.
_ore-Offices_ F₂. _o're-Offices_ F₃. _o're-offices_ F₄.

[2006] _would_] Qq. _could_ Ff.

_God_] _Heaven_ Q (1676).

[2007] _sweet lord_] Q₂ Q₃ Ff. _my lord_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

_sweet lord_] Qq. _good lord_ Ff.

[2008] _such-a-one_] _such a one's_ Hanmer.

[2009] _when he meant_] Ff. _when a ment_ Q₄. _when a meant_ Q₅ Q₆.
_when a went_ Q₂ Q₃.

_beg it_] _beg him_ Q (1676).

[2010] _now_] _now 'tis_ Rowe.

[2011] _chapless_] F₃ F₄. _chaplesse_ F₁ F₂. _choples_ Qq.

_mazzard_] F₂ F₃ F₄. _mazard_ F₁. _massene_ Q₂ Q₃. _mazer_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

[2012] _fine_] _a fine_ Q (1676) and Pope (ed. 2).

_an_] Capell. _and_ Qq. _if_ Ff.

[2013] _loggats_] _loggits_ Qq. _loggets_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _loggers_ F₄.

_with 'em?_] Ff. _with them:_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _with them?_ Q₆.

[2014] _For and_] _For,--and_ Theobald.

[2015] [Throws ...] Capell. om. Qq Ff.

[2016] _may_] Qq. _might_ Ff.

[2017] _of_] _of of_ F₁.

_quiddities_] Qq. _quiddits_ Ff.

_quillits_] (Q₁) Ff. _quillites_ Q₂ Q₃. _quillities_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

[2018] _rude_] Ff. _madde_ Q₂ Q₃. _mad_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

[2019] _action_] _actions_ Q₅ Q₆.

[2020] _is this ... recoveries_] Ff. Omitted in Qq.

[2021] _fine dirt_] _foul dirt_ S. Walker conj.

[2022] _his vouchers_] Ff. _vouchers_ Qq.

[2023] _double ones too_] Ff. _doubles_ Qq.

[2024] _lands_] _land_ Q₆.

_hardly_] Ff. _scarcely_ Qq.

[2025] _calf-skins_] _calve-skinnes_ Q₄ F₁ F₂ F₃. _calve-skins_ Q₅ Q₆
F₄. _calves-skinnes_ Q₂ Q₃.

[2026] _which_] Qq. _that_ Ff.

[2027] _sirrah_] Q₆. _sirra_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _sir_ Ff.

[2028] _Mine ... made_] As in Ff. _Mine sir, or a ... made._ (as one
line) in Qq.

[2029] [Sings] Capell. om. Qq Ff.

[2030] _For ... meet._] Ff. Omitted in Qq.

_guest_] _ghost_ Rowe (ed. 2) and Pope.

[2031] _it be_] _it_ Q₅. _it's_ Q₆.

[2032] _'tis_] Q₆. _tis_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _it is_ Ff.

[2033] _and yet_] Ff. _yet_ Qq.

_it is_] _it's_ Q (1676).

[2034] _away_] om. Q₆.

[2035] _undo_] Q₆. _undoo_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _undoe_ F₁. _follow_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[2036] _this_] Qq. _these_ Ff.

_taken_] Ff. _tooke_ Qq.

_note_] _notice_ Q (1676).

[2037] _picked_ Qq Ff. _piqued_ Q (1676).

_that_] _and_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[2038] _heel_] _heeles_ F₁.

_the courtier_] (Q₁) Qq. _our courtier_ Ff. _your courtier_ Grant White
conj.

_kibe_] _kibes_ Hunter conj.

[2039] _a_] Q₄ Q₅ Q₆. om Q₂ Q₃.

[2040] _all_] Ff. om. Qq.

[2041] _o'ercame_] _o'recame_ F₁ F₃ F₄. _orecame_ F₂. _overcame_ Qq.

[2042] _that very_] Qq. _the very_ Ff.

[2043] _that is_] Qq. _that was_ Ff.

[2044] _a' ... a' ... a'_] _a ... a ... a_ Qq. _he ... he ... he_ Ff.

[2045] _'tis_] Q₆. _tis_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _it's_ F₁ F₃ F₄. _its_ F₂.

[2046] _him there; there the men are_] _him there, there the men are_
Q₂ Q₃. _him there, there the are men_ Q₄. _him there, there are men_ Q₅
Q₆. _him, there the men are_ Ff.

[2047] _I have_] _where I have_ Q (1676).

_sexton_] Q₄ Q₅ Q₆ F₄. _sexten_ Q₂ Q₃. _sixeteene_ F₁. _sexestone_ F₂.
_sexstone_ F₃.

[2048] _here_] om. Q (1676).

[2049] _I'faith_] _Ifaith_ Ff. _Fayth_ Q₂ Q₃. _Faith_ The rest.

[2050] _a' ... a' ... a'_] _a ... a ... a_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _he ... he ...
he_ Ff. _a ... he ... a_ Q₆.

[2051] _now-a-days_] Ff. om. Qq.

[2052] _you nine year_] _you nine yeares_ F₂ F₃. _you nine years_ F₄.

[2053] _so_] om. F₃ F₄.

[2054] _a'_] _a_ Qq. _he_ Ff.

_your_] _you_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[2055] _Here's ... in the_] Ff. _heer's a skull now hath lyen you i'th_
Qq. _Here's a skull now has lain in the_ Pope.

[2056] _three and twenty_] Ff. 23. Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₆. _twenty three_ Q₅.

[2057] _A ... was?_] Two lines in Ff.

[2058] _a'_] _a_ Qq Ff. _he_ Q (1676) and Pope.

[2059] _This same skull, sir_] As in Qq. Twice in Ff.

[2060] _Yorick's_] Ff. _sir Yoricks_ Qq.

[2061] _Let me see_] Ff. Omitted in Qq. [Takes the skull.] Capell (line
170). Transferred by Dyce. om. Qq Ff.

[2062] _borne_] Ff. _bore_ Qq.

[2063] _and now how_] Qq. _and how_ Ff.

[2064] _in my ... it is_] Qq. _my imagination is_ Ff. _my imagination
is now_ Rowe.

[2065] _gambols_] _jests_ Q (1676).

[2066] _on a roar_] _in a roar_ Pope.

_Not one_] Qq. _No one_ Ff.

[2067] _grinning_] Qq. _jeering_ Ff.

[2068] _chamber_] (Q₁) Ff. _table_ Qq.

[2069] _favour_] _savour_ Warburton.

[2070] _o'_] Ff. _a_ Qq.

[2071] _so? pah_] Q₆. _so pah_ Q₂ Q₃. _so: pah_ Q₄ Q₅. _so? Puh_ Ff.

[Puts down ...] Collier. Throws it down. Capell. Smelling to the Scull.
Rowe. om. Qq Ff.

[2072] _we may_] _way we_ S. Walker conj.

[2073] _he_] Ff. _a_ Qq.

_find_] _found_ Jennens.

[2074] _thither_] F₂ Q₆ F₃ F₄. _thether_ The rest.

[2075] _as thus:_] (Q₁) Ff. Omitted in Qq.

[2076] _returneth_] _returned_ Collier (Collier MS.)

[2077] _into_] Ff. _to_ Qq.

[2078] _that loam ... was_] _this earth ... was_ or _that loam ... may
have been_ Seymour conj.

[2079] _Imperious_] Qq. _Imperiall_ F₁ F₂. _Imperial_ F₃ F₄.

[2080] _Should_] _Shoulp_ Q₄. _Sould_ Q₅.

_to expel_] _t' expell_ Qq F₁ F₃ F₄. _expell_ F₂.

_winter's_] Ff. _waters_ Qq.

[2081] _aside_] Ff. _awhile_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _a while_ Q₆.

Enter ...] Malone, after Capell. Enter K. Q. Laertes and the corse.
Qq (in margin) (King Quee. Q₄ Q₅. King, Que. Q₆). Enter King, Queene,
Laertes, and a Coffin, with Lords attendant. Ff.

[2082] SCENE II. Pope.

_who is this_] Qq. _Who is that_ F₁. _Who is't that_ F₂. _What is't
that_ F₃ F₄. _What is that_ Pope.

[2083] _rites_] Qq F₁. _rights_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[2084] _its_] Q₆. _it's_ F₃ F₄. _it_ The rest.

_of_] Qq. om. Ff.

[2085] _Couch we_] _Stand by_ Q (1676).

_we_] _me_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[Retiring ...] Capell. om. Qq Ff.

[2086] [to the Priests. Capell.

[2087] [to Horatio. Capell.

_That ... mark._] Prose in Qq Ff. Verse by Capell, ending the line
_Laertes_.

_very_] _most_ Pope, reading as verse.

_mark_] F₃ F₄. _marke_ Q₂ Q₃ F₁ F₂. _make_ Q₄ Q₅. om. Q₆.

[2088] First Priest.] 1. P. Capell. Priest. Ff. Doct. Qq.

[2089] _as far_] _so far_ Theobald (ed. 2).

[2090] _warranty_] Q₄ Q₅ Q₆. _warrantie_ Q₂ Q₃ F₂ F₃ F₄. _warrantis_
F₁. _warrantize_ Capell conj. _warranties_ Knight. _warrantise_ Dyce.

[2091] _unsanctified_] _unsanctied_ F₂ F₃.

_have_] Ff. _been_ Q₂ Q₃. _beene_ Q₄. _bin_ Q₅ Q₆.

[2092] _trumpet_] _trump_ Pope.

_prayers_] Qq. _prayer_ Ff.

[2093] _Shards_] Ff. Omitted in Qq.

_pebbles_] Q₆ F₃ F₄. _peebles_ The rest.

[2094] _allow'd_] Qq. _allowed_ Ff.

_crants_] _Crants_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _Rites_ Ff Q₆. _chants_ Warburton.
_grants_ or _wants_ or _pants_ Edwards conj. (in jest). _grants_ Heath
conj.

[2095] _strewments_] _'struments_ Edwards conj. (in jest).

[2096] _there_] om. Pope.

[2097] _a requiem_] Qq. _sage requiem_ Ff. _safe requiem_ Jackson conj.
_sad requiem_ Collier MS. _such requiem_ Dyce. _false requiem_ Anon.
conj.

[2098] _peace-parted_] _peace-departed_ F₃ F₄.

[Coffin lay'd in. Capell.

[2099] [Scattering flowers] Johnson. om. Qq Ff.

_Sweets ... farewell_] _Sweets to the sweet, farewell_ Qq. _Sweets to
the sweet farewell_ F₁ F₂. _Sweets, to thee sweet farewell_ F₃ F₄.

[2100] _shouldst_] _would'st_ F₃ F₄.

[2101] _have_] Qq. _t'have_ Ff.

_treble woe_] Q₂ Q₃ Q₆. _trebble woe_ Q₄ Q₅. _terrible woer_ F₁.
_terrible wooer_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _treble woes_ S. Walker conj.

[2102] _treble_] F₃ F₄. _trebble_ F₁ F₂. _double_ Qq. _treble woes_
Rowe, reading line 234 as F₂ F₃ F₄.

_cursed_] _curs'd_ Rowe.

[2103] _ingenious_] _ingenuous_ Q₆.

[2104] [Leaps into the grave.] F₄. Leaps in the grave. F₁ F₂ F₃. om. Qq.

[2105] _To o'ertop_] _To'retop_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _To retop_ Q₅. _T'oretop_ Q₆.

[2106] [Advancing] Capell. Discovering himself. Pope. om. Qq Ff.

[2107] _grief Bears_] _griefe Beares_ Qq. _griefes Beares_ F₁ F₂.
_griefs Bears_ F₃. _griefs Bear_ F₄.

[2108] _Conjures_] _Conjure_ F₁.

[2109] _This is_] _tis_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

[2110] [Leaps ...] Hamlet leaps ... Rowe. Hamlet leapes in after
Leartes. (Q₁). om. Qq Ff.

[Grappling ...] Rowe. om. Qq Ff.

[2111] _Thou ... throat_] Divided as in Ff. One line in Qq.

[2112] _For_] Qq. _Sir_ Ff.

_splenitive_] Warburton. _spleenitive_ or _spleenative_ Qq Ff.
_spleneticke_ Collier MS. See note (II).

_and_] Ff Q₆. om. Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.

[2113] _in me something_] Qq. _something in me_ Ff.

[2114] _wisdom_] _wisedome_ Qq. _wisenesse_ F₁ F₂. _wiseness_ F₃ F₄.

_Hold off_] Qq. _Away_ Ff.

_hand._] _hand,_ Q₂ Q₃. _hand?_ Q₄ Q₅.

[2115] All. _Gentlemen,--_] Att. _Gentlemen,--_ Capell. All.
_Gentlemen._ Qq. Omitted in Ff.

Hor.] Hora. Qq. Gen. Ff.

[The Attendants ...] Capell, substantially. The Attendants part them.
Rowe. om. Qq Ff.

[2116] _this_] _his_ Rowe.

[2117] _their_] _there_ F₁.

[2118] _'Swounds_] _S'wounds_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _Swounds_ Q₆. _Come_ Ff.

_thou'lt_] Ff. _th' owt_ Q₂ Q₃. _th' out_ Q₄ Q₅. _thou't_ Q₆.

[2119] _Woo't_] _Wilt_ (Q₁) Q (1676).

[2120] _woo't fast_] Qq. om. Ff.

_fast? woo't_] _storm, woo't_ Collier MS. _storme or_ Collier MS. apud
Hamilton.

[2121] _drink up ... crocodile?_] _drink? ape, esel, crocodile!_ Becket
conj.

_eisel_] Theobald. _vessels_ (Q₁). _Esill_ Qq. _Esile_ (in italics) Ff.
_Yssel_ Keightley (Theobald conj.) _Nile_ Hanmer. _Elsil_ (in italics)
Capell. _Nilus_ Elze (Capell conj.) _Weisel_ or _Oesil_ Steevens conj.
_Isell_ Halliwell conj.

_eat_] _woo't eat_ Hanmer. _or eat_ Hanmer as misquoted by Johnson.

[2122] _I'll do't_] _I'll do't, I'll do't_ Collier MS. _I'll do it too_
Anon. conj.

_thou_] Ff Q₆. om. Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.

_here_] _hither_ F₃ F₄. _hither but_ Pope.

[2123] _in_] _in to_ F₄. _into_ Rowe.

_grave?_] Ff Q₆. _grave,_ The rest.

[2124] _zone_] _sun_ Warburton.

[2125] _an_] Pope. _and_ Qq Ff.

[2126] Queen.] Quee. Qq. Kin. F₁. King. F₂ F₃ F₄.

[2127] Queen ... _Anon_] King ... _him._ Queen. _Anon_ Collier (Collier
MS.)

[2128] _thus_] _this_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.

[2129] _the_] _a_ Q₅ Q₆.

_dove_] Q₂ Q₃ Ff. _doe_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

[2130] _When that_] _When first_ Q (1676). _E'er that_ Warburton. _Ere
that_ Johnson. _Ere yet_ Johnson conj.

_couplets_] _cuplets_ Qq. _cuplet_ Ff.

[2131] _loved_] _loud'_ F₁.

_ever_] _well_ Q₆.

[2132] _and dog_] _a dogge_ Q₄ Q₆. _a dog_ Q₅. _the dog_ Theobald (ed.
2).

[Exit.] Ff. Exit Hamlet and Horatio. Qq.

[2133] _thee_] Qq. _you_ Ff.

[Exit Horatio.] Exit Hor. Pope. om. Ff.

[2134] [To Laertes] Rowe. om. Qq Ff.

_your_] _you_ F₁ F₂.

[2135] _An_] _In an_ Keightley.

_shortly_] Ff. _thirtie_ Q₂. _thereby_ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

[2136] _Till_] _Tell_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.

[2137] SCENE II.] Rowe. SCENE III. Pope. om. Ff.

A hall ...] Capell. A Hall. Pope. A Hall, in the Palace. Theobald.

[2138] _sir_] om. Pope.

_shall you_] Qq. _let me_ Ff.

[2139] _circumstance?_] Theobald. _circumstance._ Qq Ff.

[2140] _methought_] _my thought_ Q₂ Q₃. _me thought_ The rest.

[2141] _mutines in the_] _mutineers in the_ Rowe. _mutineers in_ Pope.

_bilboes._] _bilboes;_ Rowe. _bilboes,_ Ff. _bilbo,_ Q₂ Q₃. _bilbo's,_
Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

[2142] _Rashly, And praised ... it, let_] _rashly, And praysd ... it:
let_ Qq. _rashly, (And praise ... it) let_ Ff. _rashness (And
prais'd ... it) lets_ Pope. _rashness (And prais'd ... it) let_ Hanmer
(ed. 2). _rashly, And prais'd ... it--Let_ Steevens.

[2143] _rashness for it, let_] _rashness, for it lets_ Tyrwhitt conj.,
putting _And ... certain,_ lines 7-11, in a parenthesis.

[2144] _let ... will._] Put in a parenthesis by Jennens.

[2145] _know, Our_] _know; Or_ Warburton, reading lines 6, 7 as Pope.
_own, Our_ Collier MS.

[2146] _sometime_] Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _sometimes_ Q₅ Ff Q₆.

[2147] _deep_] Q₅ Q₆. _deepe_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _deare_ F₁ F₂. _dear_ F₃ F₄.

_pall_] Q₂ F₄. _fall_ Q₃ Q₄ Q₆. _fal_ Q₅. _paule_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _fail_ Pope.

_learn_] Qq. _teach_ Ff.

[2148] _scarf'd_] _wrapt_ Q (1676).

_me, in the dark_] _me, in the darke_ Q₆. _me in the darke_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄
Q₅. _me in the darke,_ Ff (_dark,_ F₃ F₄).

[2149] _Groped I_] _I grop'd_ Q (1676).

[2150] _again; making so_] _againe making, so_ Q₅.

[2151] _bold, My ... manners,_] _bold,_ (_My ... manners_) Ff. _bold
My ... manners_ Qq.

[2152] _fears_] _teares_ F₂ F₃. _tears_ F₄.

_unseal_] F₃ F₄. _unseale_ F₁ F₂. _unfold_ Qq.

[2153] _O_] _Oh_ Ff. _A_ Qq. _Ah_ Anon. conj.

_O royal knavery!--_] Omitted in Q (1676).

_knavery!--_] _knavery,_ Qq. _knavery:_ Ff. _knavery!_ Rowe.

[2154] _sorts_] _forts_ F₂.

_reasons_] Qq. _reason_ Ff.

[2155] _ho!_] _hoe_ Qq. _hoo,_ Ff.

[2156] _grinding_] _gringding_ F₂.

[2157] _struck_] F₁ F₃ F₄. _strucke_ F₂. _strooke_ Qq.

[2158] _now_] Qq. _me_ F₁. om. F₂ F₃ F₄.

[2159] _I beseech_] _Ay, 'beseech_ Capell.

[2160] _villanies,--Or ... play,--I_] _villanies,--Or ... play;--I_
Capell. _villaines, Or ... play, I_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _villaines,
Ere ... play. I_ Ff (_villains,_ F₃ F₄). _villaines, Or ... play: I_
Q₆. _villainy,_ (_Ere ... prologue, to my bane They ... play:_) _I_
Theobald (Warburton and Bishop conj.) _villains, and Ere ... brains,
They having ... play; I_ Hanmer. _villains, (Ere I could mark the
prologue to my bane They had ... play:) I_ Warburton.

[2161] _villanies_] _villainy_ Keightley.

[2162] _brains_] _banes_ Chisselden conj. apud Theobald MS.

[2163] _sat_] _sate_ Ff Q₆.

[2164] _labour'd_] _laboured_ F₁ F₂ F₃.

[2165] _yeoman's_] _yemans_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄.

[2166] _effect_] Qq. _effects_ Ff.

[2167] _like_] Qq. _as_ Ff.

_might_] Qq. _should_ Ff.

[2168] _stand a comma_] _hold her olive_ Bailey conj.

_a comma_] _a commere_ Theobald (Warburton). _no comma_ Theobald conj.
(withdrawn). _a cement_ Hanmer. _a co-mere_ Singer (ed. 2). _a co-mate_
Becket conj. _a column_ Jackson conj. _commercing_ Anon. conj. _a
comare_ Nicholson conj.

_a comma 'tween_] _as one atween_ Cartwright conj.

_amities_] _enmities_ Theobald conj. (withdrawn).

[2169] _such-like 'As'es_] _such like Assis_ Ff. _such like, as sir_ Qq.

[2170] _knowing of_] Qq. _know of_ Ff. _knowing_ Pope.

[2171] _the bearers_] Ff. _those bearers_ Qq.

[2172] _Not_] _No_ F₄.

_shriving-time_] Hyphened by Theobald. _thriving time_ Jennens.

_allow'd_] Q₅ Q₆. _alow'd_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _allowed_ Ff.

[2173] _ordinant_] Qq. _ordinate_ Ff.

[2174] _Folded_] _I folded_ Rowe, reading the rest of the line with Ff.

_the form of the_] _the forme of th'_ Qq. _forme of the_ Ff (_form_ F₄).

[2175] _Subscribed_] _Subscribe_ Q₂ Q₃.

_gave't_] Q₆. _gav't_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅ F₁. _gav'_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _gave_ Rowe.

[2176] _changeling_] _change was_ Pope. _changing_ Anon. conj.

[2177] _sequent_] Qq. _sement_ Ff. _sequell_ Collier MS.

[2178] _know'st_] Ff Q₆. _knowest_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.

[2179] _So ... go_] Pointed as in Qq. _So ... Rosincrance, go_ F₁. _So
Guildenstare and Rosincros, goe_ F₂ F₃ (_go_ F₃). _So, Guildenstare and
Rosincross, go_ F₄.

_go_] _went_ Q (1676).

[2180] _Why ... employment;_] Ff. Omitted in Qq.

[2181] _defeat_] Qq. _debate_ Ff.

[2182] _Does_] Q₅ Q₆. _Dooes_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _Doth_ Ff.

[2183] _the baser_] Qq F₁. _baser_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

_the baser ... comes_] _baser natures come_ Hanmer.

[2184] _fell incensed_] _fell-incensed_ Dyce, ed. 2 (S. Walker conj.)

[2185] _thinks't thee_] Dyce (S. Walker conj.) _thinkst thee_ F₁.
_think'st thee_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _thinke thee_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _think thee_ Q₅.
_think you_ Q₆. _think'st thou_ Rowe.

_upon--_] Boswell. _uppon?_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _upon?_ Q₅ Q₆. _upon_ F₁ _upon,_
F₂ F₃ F₄.

[2186] _my king_] _your king_ Anon. conj.

[2187] _Popp'd_] _Stept_ Q (1676).

[2188] _Thrown ... life_] _His angle for my proper life thrown out_
Collier MS.

[2189] _cozenage--_] Boswell. _cusnage,_ Q₂ Q₃. _cosnage,_ Q₄ Q₅.
_coozenage;_ F₁. _cozenage;_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _cosenage,_ Q₆.

_conscience,_] _conscience?_ Qq.

[2190] _To quit ... here?_] Ff. Omitted in Qq.

[2191] _this_] F₁. _his_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

_this arm_] _his own_ Collier MS.

_and_] om. Hanmer.

[2192] _evil?_] Rowe. _evill._ F₁ F₂. _evil._ F₃ F₄.

[2193] _It will ... Horatio_] Arranged as by Hanmer. Three lines,
ending _short, ... more ... Horatio,_ in Ff. Four, ending _short ...
more ... one ... Horatio,_ in Pope.

[2194] _interim is_] Hanmer. _interim's_ Ff.

[2195] _life's_] _life_ Reed (1803, 1813, 1821).

'_One_'] _one_ Ff.

[2196] _court his favours_] Rowe. _count his favours_ Ff. _court his
favour_ Theobald. _count his fervour_ Jackson conj.

[2197] Enter Osric.] Enter young Osricke. F₁. Enter Osricke. F₂. Enter
Osrick. F₃ F₄. Enter a Courtier. Qq.

[2198] SCENE IV. Pope.

[2199] Osr.] Ff. Cour. Qq.

[2200] _I humbly ... water-fly?_] One line in Ff. Two in Qq.

_sir. Dost_] Pointed as in Qq. _sir, dost_ F₁ F₂. _sir; dost_ F₃ F₄.

[2201] _Dost ... dirt._] Marked as 'Aside' by Capell.

[2202] _'tis_] _It is_ Johnson.

_chough_] _cough_ Capell (corrected in Errata).

_say_] _saw_ F₁.

[2203] _lordship_] Q₅ Q₆. _lordshippe_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _friendship_ Ff.

[2204] _sir_] Qq. om. Ff.

[2205] _Put_] Ff. om. Qq.

[2206] _it is_] Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _'tis_ Ff Q₆.

[2207] _But yet_] Qq. om. Ff.

_sultry_] Rowe. _soultry_ Q₄ Q₅ Ff Q₆. _sully_ Q₂ Q₃.

[2208] _hot, or my complexion--_] Warburton. _hot, or my complection._
Q₂ Q₃. _hot, or my complexion._ Q₄ Q₅. _hot for my complexion._ Ff.
_hot, for my complexion._ Q₆.

[2209] _sultry_] _soultery_ Q₂ Q₃. _soultry_ The rest.

[2210] _But_] om. Qq.

_bade_] _bid_ F₄. _bad_ The rest.

[2211] _to you_] _unto you_ Q₆.

_he_] Ff. _a_ Qq.

[2212] _matter--_] Rowe. _matter._ Qq Ff.

[2213] _remember--_] Pope. _remember._ Qq Ff.

[Hamlet ... hat.] Johnson. om. Qq Ff.

[2214] _good my lord_] Qq. _in good faith_ Ff.

[2215] _Sir, here ... unfellowed._] Qq. _Sir, you are not ignorant of
what excellence Laertes is at his weapon._ Ff, omitting all the rest,
which was first restored by Theobald.

[2216] _gentleman_] _gentlemen_ Q₂ Q₃.

[2217] _showing_] _shew_ Q (1676) and Theobald.

_feelingly_] _sellingly_ Q₂ Q₃. _seelingly_ Becket conj.

[2218] _the card_] _the very card_ Capell.

[2219] _in him_] _him_ Johnson conj.

_part_] _parts_ Nicholson conj.

_part ... see_] _port ... use_ Anon. conj.

[2220] _dizzy_] _dizzie_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆. _dosie_ Q₂. _dazzie_ Q₃.

[2221] _yet but yaw_] Q₂. _yet but raw_ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆. _yet but slow_
Warburton. _it but yaw_ Singer (ed. 2). _wit but yaw_ Staunton conj.

_yaw neither_] _yaw mynheer_ Bullock conj., reading _wit_ for _yet_, as
Staunton conj.

[2222] _article_] _altitude_ Johnson conj. (withdrawn).

[2223] _sir? why_] Capell. _sir, why_ Qq. _sir?_--[To Horatio] _Why_
Theobald.

_wrap_] _warp_ Becket conj.

[2224] _Sir?_] Capell. _Sir._ Qq. _Sir_,--Theobald.

[2225] _Is't not ... another tongue?_] _Is't possible not to be
understood in a mother tongue?_ Johnson conj. _It is not ... another
tongue._ Heath conj. _Is't possible not to understand in a mother
tongue?_ Malone conj.

_understand ... tongue? You_] _understand? In another tongue you_
Jennens.

_in another_] _in's mother_ Staunton conj.

_tongue?_] Theobald. _tongue_, Qq.

[2226] _You ... really_] _You will too't sir really_ Q₂. _You will
doo't sir really_ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _You will doe't sir really_ Q₆. _You will
do't, sir, rarely_ Theobald. _You do't, sir, rarely_ Heath conj. Given
to Osric, Becket conj.

_really_] _readily_ Jackson conj., reading the rest with Jennens.

[2227] _Laertes?_] Q₆. _Laertes._ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.

[2228] _sir._] _sir?_ Capell.

[2229] _ignorant--_] Theobald, _ignorant._ Qq.

[2230] _me. Well, sir?_] Edd. (Globe ed.) _me, well sir._ Qq. _me.
Well, sir._ Theobald.

[2231] _not ignorant_] Q₂ Q₃. _ignorant_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

_is--_] Malone. _is:_ Capell. _is._ Qq. _is at his weapon?_ Caldecott,
from Ff.

[2232] _but,_] _for,_ Capell.

[2233] _for his_] Q₆. _for this_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.

[2234] _in his_] _in this_ Capell.

[2235] _king, sir_] _sir king_ F₁.

_hath wagered_] _hath wagerd_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _hath wager'd_ Q₆. _ha's
wag'd_ F₁. _has wag'd_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[2236] _he has imponed_] Theobald. _hee has impaund_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _he
has impawn'd_ Q₆. _he impon'd_ Ff. _he has deponed_ Johnson conj.

[2237] _hanger_] Qq. _hangers_ Ff.

_and so_] Qq. _or so_ Ff.

[2238] Hor. _I knew ... done._] Qq. Omitted in Ff. Marked as 'Aside' by
Theobald.

[2239] _carriages_] Ff Q₆. _carriage_ The rest.

[2240] _germane_ F₃ F₄. _Germaine_ F₁. _Germane_ F₂. _Ierman_ Q₂ Q₃
_German_ Q₄ Q₅. _german_ Q₆.

[2241] _matter if_] Qq. _matter: If_ Ff

_a cannon_] Qq (_a canon_ Q₅). _cannon_ Ff.

[2242] _it might be_] _it be_ Q₂. _it be might_ Q₃.

_on:_] Pope. _on_ F₁. _on,_ The rest.

[2243] _French bet_] Qq. _French but_ F₁. _French, but_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[2244] _French ... Why_] _French; but against the Danish, why_ Rowe.

[2245] _this 'imponed,' as_] _this impon'd as_ Ff. _this all_ Qq.

[2246] _sir, that_] Qq. _that_ Ff.

[2247] _yourself_] _your selfe_ Qq. _you_ Ff.

[2248] _he ... nine;_] An interpolation from the margin, Mitford conj.

_laid on_] Q₅ Q₆. _layd on_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _one_ Ff. _won_ or _on_ Mitford
conj.

_nine_] Qq. _mine_ Ff.

_it_] Qq. _that_ Ff.

[2249] _hall: if ... majesty, it_] _hall; if ... majestie, it_ Ff.
_hall, if ... maiestie, it_ Qq. _hall, if ... majesty: it_ Seymour conj.

[2250] _it is_] Qq. _'tis_ Ff.

[2251] _hold_] _holding_ Capell.

[2252] _an_] Capell. _and_ Qq. _if_ Ff.

_I will_] Qq. _Ile_ F₁ F₂. _I'le_ F₃. _I'll_ F₄. _I_ Collier MS. See
note (II).

[2253] _redeliver you e'en so_] Ff. _deliver you so_ Qq.

[2254] _this_] _that_ Capell.

[2255] [Exit. F₂ F₃ F₄. om. Qq F₁.

[2256] _Yours, yours._ [Exit Osric.] _He does_] Capell. _Yours, yours;
he does_ Ff (_hee_ F₁). _Yours doo's_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _Yours does_ Q₆.
_Yours. He does_ Jennens.

[2257] _it himself_] _it self_ Q (1676), reading with Qq.

_for's_] _for his_ Q₅ Q₆.

_turn_] _turne_ Qq. _tongue_ Ff.

[2258] _runs_] _ran_ Johnson conj.

[2259] _He did comply with_] Ff (_Complie_ F₁). _A did sir with_ Q₂.
_A did so sir with_ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆. _He did so, sir, with_ Q (1676) and
Theobald. _He did so with_ Rowe. _He did complement with_ Hanmer. _He
did compliment with_ Warburton.

_before he_] Ff. _before a_ Qq.

[2260] _has he_] Qq. _had he_ Ff.

_many_] Qq. _mine_ F₁. _nine_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

_breed_] Q₅ Q₆. _breede_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _Beauy_ F₁. _Beavy_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[2261] _and outward_] Ff. _and out of an_ Qq. _an outward_ Capell.

_and ... a_] _and (out of an habit of encounter) a_ Jennens.

_yesty_] Ff. _histy_ Q₂ Q₃. _misty_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆. _hasty_ Anon. conj.

_and outward ... a kind_] _and out of the habit of encounter get a
kind_ Bailey conj.

[2262] _collection_] _diction_ Bailey conj.

[2263] _fond and winnowed_] Ff. _prophane and trennowed_ Q₂ Q₃.
_prophane and trennowned_ Q₄. _profane and trennowned_ Q₅ Q₆. _prophane
and renowned_ Q (1676). _fann'd and winnowed_ Hanmer (Warburton). _sane
and renowned_ Johnson conj. _profane and tres-renowned_ Jennens. _sound
and winnowed_ Mason conj. _fond and vinewed_ or _fond and fennowed_
Nicholson conj. _proven and renowned_ Bullock conj.

_profound and renowned_ Bailey conj.

[2264] _trial_] _triall_ Qq. _tryalls_ F₁ F₂. _tryals_ F₃ F₄.

[2265] Enter ... _instructs me._] Qq. Omitted in Ff.

[2266] _Osric_] _Ostricke_ Qq.

[2267] _to use_] _use_ S. Walker conj. reading lines 192--195 as three
lines of verse, ending _use ... Laertes ... me._

[2268] _fall_] Q₂ Q₃. _goe_ Q₄ Q₆. _go_ Q₅.

[2269] [Exit Lord.] Theobald, om. Qq Ff.

[2270] _lose this wager_] Ff. _loose_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _lose_ Q₆.

[2271] _But_] _but_ Ff. om. Qq.

_how ill all's_] Qq. _how all_ Ff. _how all's_ Rowe. _how ill all is_
Collier MS. (_how ill is all_ according to Hamilton).

[2272] _good my_] _my good_ Theobald (ed. 2).

_lord,--_] Capell. _lord._ Qq Ff.

[2273] _gain-giving_] Ff. _gam-giuing_ Q₂ Q₃. _game-giuing_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.
_boding_ Q (1676). _misgiving_ Pope (ed. 2). _'gaingiving_ Capell.

[2274] _obey it_] Qq. _obey._ Ff.

[2275] _there is_] Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _there's a_ Ff. _there is a_ Q₆.

[2276] _now_] Ff. om. Qq.

[2277] _will_] _well_ Q₂ Q₃.

[2278] _the readiness ... Let be._] See note (XXXII).

[2279] Enter ...] Ff, substantially. A table prepard, Trumpets, Drums
and officers with Cushions, King, Queene, and all the state, Foiles,
daggers, and Laertes. Qq.

Osric and other Attendants....] Osrick with other Attendants....
Theobald. with other Attendants.... Ff.

[2280] [The King ...] Gives him the hand of Laertes. Hanmer. King puts
the hand of Laertes into the hand of Hamlet. Johnson. om. Qq Ff.

[2281] _I've_] Ff. _I have_ Qq.

[2282] _But ... knows,_] As in Ff. One line in Qq. S. Walker would end
lines 213, 214, _pardon't ... knows._

[2283] _This ... done_] Three lines, ending _heard ... distraction ...
done,_ in Rowe.

[2284] _This ... audience,_] Omit, as spurious. Seymour conj.

[2285] _punish'd_] _punished_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[2286] _sore_] Ff. _a sore_ Qq.

_distraction._] _distraction:_ Q₄ Q₅. _distraction,_ Q₂ Q₃.
_distraction;_ Q₆. _distraction?_ Ff.

[2287] _nature, honour_] Qq. _nature honour_ F₁. _natures honour_ F₂ F₃
F₄. _native honour_ Anon. conj.

[2288] _madness:_] _madnesse._ Qq. _madnesse?_ F₁ F₂. _madness?_ F₃ F₄.

[2289] _wrong'd_] Ff. _wronged_ Qq.

[2290] _Sir ... audience,_] Ff. Omitted in Qq.

[2291] _mine_] (Q₁) Ff. _my_ Qq.

[2292] _brother_] (Q₁) Qq. _mother_ Ff.

[2293] _masters_] _master_ S. Walker conj.

[2294] _precedent_] Johnson. _president_ Qq Ff.

[2295] _keep_] F₃ F₄. _keepe_ F₁ F₂. om. Qq.

_ungored_] _ungord_ Q₂ Q₃. _ungor'd_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆. _ungorg'd_ Ff.

_till_] Ff. _all_ Qq.

[2296] _offer'd_] _offered_ Q₅ Q₆.

[2297] _I_] Qq. _I do_ F₁ F₃ F₄. _I doe_ F₂.

[2298] _I ... play_] Divided as in Ff. Prose in Qq.

[2299] _Come on._] Ff. Omitted in Qq.

[2300] _darkest_] Qq F₁. _brightest_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[2301] _Stick ... indeed_] _Appear_ Q (1676).

_Stick_] {_Strike_} Keightley.

_off_] Ff Q₆. _of_ The rest.

[2302] _by this hand_] _on my honour_ Q (1676).

[2303] _Give ... wager?_] Divided as in Qq. Two lines, the first ending
_Osricke_, in Ff.

[2304] _them_] Qq F₁. om. F₂ F₃ F₄.

_Osric_] _Ostricke_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _Ostrick_ Q₅ Q₆.

_Cousin_] om. Pope, dividing as Ff.

_Hamlet_] _Ham._ Q₄ Q₅.

[2305] _wager?_] Capell. _wager._ Qq Ff.

_Very well_] _Well_ Pope.

[2306] _lord; Your ... laid the_] _lord, Your ... laid; the_ Heath conj.

[2307] _has_] Qq. _hath_ Ff.

_laid_] _layed_ Q₂ Q₃. _layde_ Q₄. _laide_ F₁.

_the odds o' the_] _upon the_ Hanmer.

_o' the_] _o' th'_ F₄. _a' th_ Qq. _a' th'_ F₁ F₂ F₃.

[2308] _I do ... both_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[2309] _But_] _'Tis true he did neglect his exercises, But_ Keightley
conj.

_he is_] _he's_ Pope.

_better'd_] Ff. _better_ Qq.

_we_] _you_ Capell.

[2310] _This is ... length?_] Two lines in Qq. Four in Ff.

[2311] _too_] Ff Q₆. _to_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.

[2312] _have_] _have have_ F₂.

_length?_] Rowe. _length._ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅ Ff. _length_ Q₆.

[They prepare....] Prepare.... Ff. Omitted in Qq. Prepares.... Rowe
(ed. 2).

[2313] _stoups_] _stoopes_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _stooops_ Q₅ Q₆. _stopes_ Ff.

_that_] _the_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

[2314] _give_] _gives_ Theobald.

[2315] _of the third_] _of a third_ F₃ F₄. _to the third_ Q (1703).

[2316] _union_] Ff. _Vnice_ Q₂. _Onixe_ Q₃ Q₄. _Onix_ Q₅. _Onyx_ Q₆.

[2317] _In ... cups_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[2318] _trumpet_] Qq. _trumpets_ Ff.

[2319] _trumpet_] _trumpets_ F₃ F₄.

[2320] _heaven to_] Q₂ Q₃ Ff. _heavens to_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

[2321] _'Now ... Hamlet.'_] Italicised by Capell.

[Trumpets the while. Qq. om. Ff.

[2322] _Come, my lord._] Qq. _Come on sir._ Ff. _So on, sir_ Rowe (ed.
2).

[They play.] Ff. om. Qq.

[2323] _palpable_] _palbable_ Q₆.

[2324] _Stay ... thine;_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[2325] [Trumpets ...] Malone. Drum, trumpets and shot. Florish, a peece
goes off. Qq (after _hit_, line 268). Trumpets sound, and shot goes
off. F₁ (after _cup_). Trumpets sound, shot goes off. F₂ F₃ F₄ (after
cup). Drinks, and puts Poison in the Cup. Flourish. Ordinance within.
Capell.

[2326] _set it_] Qq. _set_ Ff.

[2327] _Come._] _Come:_ Ff. _Come,_ Qq.

[They play.] Rowe. om. Qq. Ff.

[2328] _A touch, a touch,_] Ff. Omitted in Qq.

_confess_] _confest_ Qq. _confess't_ Q (1676) and Capell.

[2329] _fat_] _faint_ Wyeth conj. _hot_ Brady conj.

[2330] _Here ... napkin_] Qq. _Heere's a napkin_ F₁. _Here's a napkin_
F₂ F₃ F₄.

_rub_] _wipe_ Q₆.

_Here ... brows:_] _Here is a napkin, rub thy brows, my son._ Collier
MS.

[2331] _Good_] _Thank you, good_ Capell.

_Gertrude_] _Gertrude, Gertrude_ Keightley.

[2332] _I will ... me._] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[Drinks. Hanmer. Drinks, and tenders the Cup to Hamlet. Capell.

[2333] [Aside] First marked by Rowe.

[2334] _I ... by._] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[2335] _My lord,_] om. Pope.

[2336] _it is ... against_] Qq. _'tis ... 'gainst_ Ff. _'tis ...
against_ Q (1676).

[2337] _Come ... dally;_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_third, Laertes: you_] Steevens. _third, Laertes. You_ Johnson. _third
Laertes, you doe_ Qq. _third. Laertes, you_ Ff.

[2338] _afeard_] F₃ F₄. _affear'd_ F₁. _affeard_ F₂. _sure_ Qq.
_afraid_ Rowe.

[2339] [They play.] Play. Ff. om. Qq.

[2340] [Laertes ... Laertes.] Rowe. They catch one anothers Rapiers,
and both are wounded, Laertes falles downe, the Queene falles downe and
dies. (Q₁). In scuffling they change Rapiers. Ff. Omitted in Qq.

[2341] _come, again._] _come, againe._ F₁. _come againe._ Qq F₂. _come
again._ F₃ F₄.

[The Queen falls.] Queen falls. Capell. om. Qq Ff.

_there, ho!_] _there.--Ho!_ Staunton. See note (XXXIII).

_ho_] Q₆. _hoa_ Ff. _howe_ Q₂ Q₃. _hoe_ Q₄ Q₅.

[2342] _is it_] Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _is't_ Ff Q₆.

[2343] _How is't, Laertes?_] _Host ist Laeres?_ Q₄.

[2344] _Why ... Osric;_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_to mine_] _in my_ Q (1676) and Hanmer.

_mine own_] _mine_ F₁. _my_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _my own_ Pope.

_springe_] Q₅. _sprindge_ The rest.

_Osric_] _Ostrick_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _Ostricke_ Q₆.

[2345] _I am_] _I'm_ Pope.

[2346] _swounds_] F₃ F₄. _sounds_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅ F₁ F₂. _swounes_ Q₆.

[2347] _O my ... drink!_] Arranged as in Qq. One line in Ff.

[2348] _poison'd_] F₃ F₄. _poysned_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _poyson'd_ F₁ F₂.
_poysoned_ Q₆.

[Dies.] Queen dies. Rowe. om. Qq Ff.

[2349] _villany_] _villaine_ Q₅ Q₆.

_Ho!_] _Ho_ Q₆. _how_ Q₂ Q₃. _Hoe_ Q₄ Q₅. _How?_ Ff. _How?--_Jennens.

[2350] _It is ... slain;_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_Hamlet: Hamlet_] _Hamlet. Hamlet_ Ff. _Hamlet_ Qq.

[2351] _medicine_] Ff Q₆. _medcin_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄. _medecine_ Q₅.

[2352] _hour of_] Ff. _houres_ Qq.

[2353] _thy hand_] Ff Q₆. _my hand_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.

[2354] _Unbated_] _Imbaited_ Theobald conj. (withdrawn).

[2355] _lo,_] _so_ Q (1676).

[2356] _poison'd_] F₃ F₄. _poyson'd_ F₁ F₂ Q₆. _poysned_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅.

[2357] _can_] _am_ Q₅ Q₆.

_to blame_] _too blame_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅ F₁.

[2358] _The ... work._] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

[2359] _The point envenom'd_] _The point--envenom'd_ Staunton.

[2360] _envenom'd ... work._] One line in Keightley.

[2361] _to thy_] _do thy_ Theobald (ed. 2).

[Stabs the King.] Rowe. Hurts the King. Ff. Omitted in Qq.

[2362] _Here_] _Heare_ Q₂ Q₃.

_Here ... Dane,_] One line in Qq. Two, the first ending _murdrous,_ in
Ff.

_incestuous_] Ff Q₆. _incestious_ The rest.

_murderous_] _murdrous_ F₁ F₂. _murd'rous_ F₃ F₄. om. Qq.

[2363] _off this_] Ff Q₆. _of this_ The rest.

_thy union_] (Q₁) Ff. _the Onixe_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _the Onyx_ Q₆. _the
union_ Theobald.

[2364] [King dies.] om. Qq.

[2365] _He ... himself._] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

[2366] _temper'd_] Q₆. _temperd_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _temp'red_ Ff.

[2367] _upon_] _on_ Theobald.

[2368] _me!_] _me._ Qq Ff.

[Dies.] om. Qq.

[2369] _thee free_] _the free_ Theobald.

[2370] _I am_] _I'm_ Pope.

[2371] _to this_] Qq F₁. _at this_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[2372] _time--as ... arrest--O_] _time, (as ... arrest) oh_ Ff Q₆.
_time, as ... arrest, ô_ Q₂ Q₃. _time as ... arrest. O_ Q₄ Q₅.

[2373] _his_] Qq F₁. _this_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

_you--_] Pope. _you,_ Q₂ Q₃ F₂ F₃ F₄. _you!_ Q₄ Q₅. _you._ F₁. _you;_
Q₆.

[2374] _cause aright_] Q₄ Q₅ Q₆. _cause a right_ Q₂ Q₃. _causes right_
Ff.

[2375] _the_] _be_ F₃ F₄.

_Never believe_] _Never; believe_ Hanmer.

[takes the cup. Collier MS. See note (II).

[2376] _I am_] _I'm_ Pope.

_antique_] Q₆. _anticke_ Q₂ Q₃. _antike_ Q₄ Q₅ F₁ F₂. _antick_ F₃ F₄.

[2377] _As ... have't._] Divided as in Qq. The first line ends _cup,_
in Ff.

[2378] _thou'rt_] Capell. _th'art_ Qq. Ff.

[2379] _by heaven,_] om. Q (1676).

_have't_] F₁ F₂. _hate_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _hav't_ Q₆ F₃ F₄.

[Struggling, Hamlet gets it. Collier MS. See note (II).

[2380] _good Horatio_] Ff. _god Horatio_ Q₂ Q₃. _God Horatio_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.
_God!--Horatio_ Capell.

[2381] _live_] Ff. _I leave_ Qq. _leave_ Grant White.

[2382] [firings within. Capell.

[2383] _story_] _tale_ Pope.

[March ... shot within.] Steevens. March afarre off, and shout within.
Ff. A march a farre off. Qq. Omitted by Capell.

_this?_] _this?_ [Exit Osrick. Jennens.

[Enter Osrick. Qq Ff. Omitted first by Capell.

[2384] SCENE VI. Pope.

[2385] _To the_] _To th'_ Q₂ Q₃ Ff. _Th th'_ Q₄. _Th'_ Q₅ Q₆.

[2386] _To ... volley._] Divided as in Pope. One line in Qq Ff.

[2387] _ambassadors_] _ambassador_ Hanmer.

[2388] _quite_] _quie_ F₂.

_o'er-crows_] _ore-growes_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

[2389] _and less_] _or less_ F₄.

[2390] _solicited._] Ff. _solicited,_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₄ Q₅. _solicited:_ Q₆.
_solicited,--_Capell. _so limited--_Jackson conj.

_solicited. The...._ Hor. _Now_] _solicited--_[Dies.] Hor. _The ...
silence. Now_ Anon. conj.

_is silence_] _is in silence_ Q₆. _in silence_ Q (1676).

_silence._] Qq. _silence. O, o, o, o._ F₁. _silence, O, o, o, o,_ F₂.
_silence, O, o, o._ F₃ F₄.

[Dies.] Ff. om. Qq.

[2391] _Now ... prince,_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_cracks_] _cracke_ F₁.

_sweet prince_] _be blest_ Collier MS.

_prince_] _prience_ F₂.

[2392] _flights_] _flight_ Q₅ Q₆. _choires_ Q (1676).

_sing_] _singe_ Q₄ Q₅. _wing_ Warburton.

[March within.] Capell (after line 348). om. Qq Ff.

[2393] Enter....] Theobald. Enter Fortinbras and English
Ambassador, ... Ff. Enter Fortenbrasse, with the Embassadors. Qq
(Fortinbrasse Q₄ Q₅ Q₆).

[2394] _this_] _the_ F₃ F₄.

_you_] Qq. _ye_ Ff.

[2395] _search._] _search?_ Q₆.

[2396] _This_] Qq. _His_ Ff.

_cries on_] _cries out,_ Hanmer. _cries,--on_ Jackson conj.

_proud_] _prou'd_ Q₂ Q₃.

[2397] _thine eternal_] _thine infernall_ Q₆. _thy infernal_ Theobald.

[2398] _shot_] Qq. _shoote_ F₁. _shoot_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[2399] _struck_] Rowe. _strook_ Q₂ Q₃ F₃ F₄. _strooke_ Q₄ Q₅ F₁.

First Amb.] 1. E. Capell. Embas. Qq. Amb. Ff.

[2400] _life_] _breath_ Q (1676).

[2401] _commandment_] _commandement_ Qq. _command'ment_ Ff.

[2402] _jump_] _apt_ Q (1676). _full_ Pope.

[2403] _Polack_] F₃ F₄. _Pollack_ Q₂ Q₃ Q₆. _Pollock_ Q₄ Q₅. _Polake_
F₁ F₂.

[2404] _the view_] _publick view_ Q (1676).

[2405] _to the yet_] _to th' yet_ Q₄ Q₅ Ff Q₆. _to yet_ Q₂ Q₃.

[2406] _carnal_] _cruell_ Q₄ Q₅ Q₆.

[2407] _deaths_] _death's_ F₁ F₂.

_forced cause_] _forc'd cause_ Ff. _for no cause_ Qq.

[2408] _noblest_] _nobless_ Q (1676) and Pope (ed. 2).

[2409] _rights_] Qq. _Rites_ Ff.

[2410] _Which ... me._] One line in Qq. Two, the first ending _doth,_
in Ff.

_now to_] Qq. _are to_ Ff.

_vantage_] _interest_ Q (1676).

[2411] _shall have also_] Qq. _shall have alwayes_ F₁. _shall alwayes_
F₂ F₃. _shall always_ F₄. _shall likewise have_ Long MS.

[2412] _And ... more:_] One line in Qq. Two, the first ending _mouth,_
in Ff.

_on more_] Ff. _no more_ Qq.

[2413] _same_] _scene_ Collier (Collier MS.)

[2414] _Even ... mischance_] One line in Qq. Two, the first ending
_wilde,_ in Ff.

_while_] Qq. _whiles_ Ff.

[2415] _plots and_] Qq. _plots, and_ Ff.

[2416] _to the_] _off the_ F₃ F₄.

[2417] _To ... passage,_] One line in Qq. Two, the first ending
_royally:_ in Ff.

_royally_] Ff. _royall_ Qq.

[2418] _rites_] Ff. _right_ Qq. _rights_ Q (1676).

[2419] _bodies_] Qq. _body_ Ff.

[2420] _amiss_] _amisse_ Qq. _amis_ F₁. _ami ess_ F₂.

[2421] [A dead march.] Capell.

Exeunt....] Exeunt solemnly,.... Capell. Exeunt. Qq. Exeunt Marching:
after the which, a Peale of Ordenance are shot off. Ff (after which F₃
F₄. Ordnance F₂ F₃ F₄).




NOTES.


NOTE I.

ACT I. SCENE I. In this play the Acts and Scenes are marked in the
Folios only as far as the second Scene of the second Act, and not at
all in the Quartos.


NOTE II.

I. 1. 91. This and other emendations of the MS. corrector, not recorded
by Mr Collier, are given on the authority of Mr Hamilton (_An Enquiry
into the Genuineness of the MS. Corrections in Mr J. Payne Collier's
annotated Shakespeare_, pp. 34--85).


NOTE III.

I. 3. 74. The following are the readings of the different editions and
the emendations which have been proposed for this line:

    'Are of a most select and generall chiefe in that:' (Q₁).

    'Or of a most select and generous, chiefe in that:' Q₂ Q₃.

    'Ar of a most select and generous, cheefe in that:' Q₄.

    'Are of a most select and generous, chiefe in that:' Q₅ Q₆.

    'Are of a most select and generous cheff in that.' Ff.

    'Are most select and generous, chief in that.'

              Rowe, Pope, Theobald, Hanmer, Warburton, Johnson,
                  Capell, Steevens (1793), Rann, Caldecott, Singer,
                  Harness, Delius, &c.

    'Are most select, and generous, chief in that.' Steevens (1773).

    'Are most select, and generous chief, in that.'

                                               Steevens (1778 and 1785).


    'Are of a most select and generous chief, in that.' Malone.

    'Select and generous, are most choice in that.' Steevens conj.

    'Are of a most select and generous choice in that.'

            Collier MS., adopted by Elze, Collier, ed. 2, and Keightley.

    'Are of a most select and generous sheaf in that.' Staunton.

    'Are most select and generous in that.' Grant White.

    'Are of a most select and generous class in that.' Bullock conj.

    'Are of a most select and generous choice.' Lloyd conj.


NOTE IV.

I. 3. 109. The second and third Quartos include the words
'not ... thus' in a parenthesis. In the fourth, fifth, and sixth, the
parenthesis ends at 'phrase;' an arrangement, which was adopted by Pope
and corrected by Theobald at Warburton's suggestion. The Folios have no
parenthesis.


NOTE V.

I. 3. 117. Malone conjectured that some epithet to 'blazes' has been
omitted; and Coleridge 'did not doubt that a spondee had dropt out
of the line.' He proposed either 'Go to, these blazes, daughter,' or
'these blazes, daughter, mark you.' _Notes and Lectures_, 1. p. 220
(ed. 1849).


NOTE VI.

I. 4. 36, 37. We have left this corrupt passage unaltered because none
of the conjectures proposed appear to be satisfactory.

Rann, reading in his text:

                  'The dram of base
    Doth all the noble substance of worth out
    To his own scandal....'

gives some conjectures, without naming the authors, in a note thus:
'_Doth all, &c. oft corrupt: oft work out: eat out: By it's own
scandal._'

The first of these alterations, 'oft corrupt,' anticipates one which
Mitford published as his own, and the third, 'eat out,' is borrowed
from the author of 'the Revisal' (Heath).

Mr Grant White suggests that "the corruption lurks in a part of the
passage hitherto unsuspected, and that 'Doth' is either a misprint of
'Hath,' or has the sense of 'accomplishes.'" Mr Keightley reads,

                  'The dram of evil
    Doth all the noble substance, out o' doubt,
    To his own scandal....'

marking the sentence as incomplete.


NOTE VII.

I. 4. 61. Steevens says 'The first Folio reads--_remote_.' We have not
been able to find this reading in any copy of that edition which we
have consulted. Sir Frederic Madden has kindly collated for us the four
copies in the British Museum, all of which have 'remoued.' This is also
the reading of Capell's copy, of Malone's, and of two others to which
we have had access, and it is the reading in Mr Booth's reprint.


NOTE VIII.

I. 5. 80. 'A very learned lady,' probably Mrs Montagu, suggested to
Johnson that this line 'O, horrible! O, horrible! most horrible!'
should be given to Hamlet, and it is said that Garrick adopted this
suggestion when he played Hamlet. Rann appears to be the first editor
who put it in his text. Mr Verplanck and Mr Hudson have followed his
example.

In the Quarto of 1603, (Q₁), the Ghost says 'O horrible, most
horrible!' and Hamlet interrupts with 'O God!'


NOTE IX.

I. 5. 113-116. The second Quarto followed by the rest reads thus:

                    '_Enter Horatio, and Marcellus._

    _Hora._ My Lord, my Lord.

    _Mar._ Lord _Hamlet_.

    _Hora._ Heauens secure him.

    _Ham._ So be it.

    _Mar._ Illo, ho, ho, my Lord.'

The Folios have:

    '_Hor. & Mar. within._ My Lord, my Lord.

                     _Enter Horatio and Marcellus._

    _Mar._ Lord _Hamlet_.

    _Hor._ Heauen secure him.

    _Mar._ So be it.

    _Hor._ Illo, ho, ho, my Lord.'

Capell first transferred the stage direction '_Enter Horatio and
Marcellus_' to follow line 117, and added the direction '_within_' to
all the previous speeches. In this he has been followed by Steevens
(1778) and all subsequent editors. As however the first Quarto, which
was taken down probably during the representation of the play, puts the
words _Enter Horatio, and Marcellus_ opposite 'My Lord, my Lord,' it is
probable that they really entered at that place but were supposed, it
being night-time, not to be seen by Hamlet till they were close to him.

Capell followed the Quartos in assigning 'So be it' to Hamlet.


NOTE X.

I. 5. 157-160. The second Quarto followed substantially by the rest
reads thus:

    'Come hether Gentlemen,
    And lay your hands againe vpon my sword,
    Sweare by my sword
    Neuer to speak of this that you haue heard.'

The first Folio has:

    'Come hither Gentlemen,
    And lay your hands again upon my sword,
    Neuer to speake of this that you have heard:
    Sweare by my Sword.'

The following Folios put a full stop after 'sword' in the second line.

Capell, taking the order of words from the Quartos, arranged as three
lines, thus:

    'Come hither, gentlemen, and lay your hands
    Again upon my sword; Swear by my sword,
    Never to speak of this that you have heard.'

The first Quarto supports the order of the words as found in the Folio.
Perhaps we might follow it and arrange the words of the Folio in three
lines ending 'hands' ... 'speak' ... 'sword.'


NOTE XI.

II. 1. 79. Theobald, who is followed by Hanmer, Warburton, and Johnson,
reads 'loose' for 'foul'd,' on the authority as he says of 'the elder
Quartos.' It is not the reading of any of the first six, but of those
of 1676, 1683, 1695 and 1703. Had Capell been aware of this, he
would scarcely have designated Theobald's mistake as 'a downright
falsehood.' Theobald, at the time of writing his 'Shakespeare
Restored,' knew of no Quarto earlier than that of 1637 (_Shakespeare
Restored_, p. 70), and it is just possible that some copy of this
edition (Q₆), from which that of 1676 was printed, may have had the
reading 'loose.' We have given in the note to III. 4. 59 an instance of
different readings in two copies of Q₆.


NOTE XII.

II. 2. 111, 112. In the Quartos Polonius's comment, 'that's an ill
phrase ...,' is printed in italics like the letter, and there is some
confusion in the next line. The second, third, fourth and fifth have
'_but you shall heare: thus in her excellent white bosom, these &c._'
The sixth puts a comma after '_heare_.' In the Folios these last words
are printed in Roman type as if they were part of Polonius's comment,
thus: 'but you shall heare these in her excellent white bosome, these.'

Rowe printed: 'but you shall hear--_These to her excellent white bosom,
these_--'

The succeeding editors followed Rowe, down to Capell who restored the
word '_in_' for '_to_.' The reading and punctuation of our text was
first given substantially by Jennens, and adopted by Malone.


NOTE XIII.

II. 2. 123. In the fourth and fifth Quartos the word 'Hamlet,' in
italics, is by mistake printed not at the end of the letter but
opposite to the first line of Polonius's speech.


NOTE XIV.

II. 2. 169. The Quartos have '_Enter Hamlet_' after 'try it,' line 166,
and '_Exit King and Queene_' after the words 'both away,' line 168. The
Folios have '_Enter Hamlet, reading on a Booke_' after 'try it,' line
166, and '_Exit King & Queen_' after 'presently,' line 169. The Quartos
put commas at 'presently,' and 'leave,' reading 'Ile ... leave' as one
line; the Folios put full stops, reading 'Oh give me leave. How does my
good Lord Hamlet?' as one line.

The earlier editors down to Johnson inclusive made no change.

Capell supposed the words 'O, give me leave' to be addressed, not to
Hamlet, but to the King and Queen, whose _Exeunt_ he placed after these
words. His arrangement has been followed by all subsequent editors,
till we ventured, in the Globe edition, to recur to the old order. It
appears to us that the words 'O, give me leave,' commencing with an
exclamation, are more naturally addressed to Hamlet than to the King
and Queen, with whom Polonius had been previously conversing.

Mr Dyce transferred the entrance of Hamlet to follow the _Exeunt_ of
the King and Queen, line 169. As in the first Quarto he is made to
enter earlier, it is possible that he was in sight of the audience,
though so intent on his book as not to observe the presence of the
others.


NOTE XV.

II. 2. 564. Capell quotes 'braves' as the reading of the Quarto of
1605. His own copy has 'braines.' That in the British Museum reads
'braues.'


NOTE XVI.

III. 1. 86. In this doubtful passage we have retained the reading of
the Quartos, although the players' Quartos of 1676, 1683, 1695, 1703,
have, contrary to their custom, followed the Folios, which may possibly
indicate that 'pith' was the reading according to the stage tradition.


NOTE XVII.

III. 2. 156, 157. Jennens prints in brackets the line of the Quartos
which we have omitted, and conjectures, as Johnson had done before him,
that a line is lost either before or after it, which should rhyme to
'love.' As in the Quartos the line 'For women feare too much, even as
they love,' occurs at the top of a page, the omission is more likely
to have been caused by a line having dropped out at the foot of the
previous page. Mr Keightley marks the omission of a line after 'love.'
Malone supposes that the 'Either none' of the Quartos in line 158 was
the commencement of the lost line, which he suggests may have run as
follows:

    'Either none they feel, or an excess approve.'

Steevens proposes to retain the omitted line, reading 'lust' for
'love,' making a triplet rhyme with the preceding lines.

The Quarto probably gives us the author's first thought, incomplete, as
well as the lines which he finally adopted, as they stand in the Folio.
The thought will hardly bear to be expanded over four lines.


NOTE XVIII.

III. 2. 329. Mason conjectured that the words 'To withdraw with you'
were spoken to the players whom Hamlet wished to get rid of, and
proposed to read 'So, withdraw you,' or 'So withdraw, will you?' Malone
adds the stage direction 'Taking Guil. aside.' Steevens supposes that
the words 'To ... you' "may refer to some gesture which Guildenstern
had used, and which, at first was interpreted by Hamlet into a
signal for him to attend the speaker into another room. 'To withdraw
with you?' (says he) 'Is that your meaning?'" Mr Staunton, agreeing
substantially with Mason, proposes to read 'So,--[_taking a recorder_]
withdraw with you.' He adds that the disputed words may have been
intended to mark the departure of the players. Jackson (1819) proposed
the same reading and explanation, adding a stage direction, '_To the
Players, who exit._'

If the reading and punctuation given in our text be right, the words
seem to be addressed to Guildenstern. Mr Knight, however, suggests that
'Rosencrantz and Guildenstern have intimated, by some signal, that they
wish to speak with Hamlet in private.'


NOTE XIX.

III. 2. 366--371. In this passage we have followed the distribution of
the Folios. In the Quartos it stands thus:

    'They foole me to the top of my bent, I will come by and by,
    Leaue me friends.
    I will, say so. By and by is easily said,
    'Tis now &c.'

In the Quarto of 1676 the words 'I will come ... said' are marked in
inverted commas to indicate that they were omitted by the actors. Pope
following the arrangement of the Quartos, reading 'I will say so' with
the Quarto of 1676.


NOTE XX.

III. 4. 4. We have adopted Hanmer's correction 'sconce' for 'silence'
because in the corresponding passage of the first Quarto Polonius says:
'I'le shrowde my selfe behinde the Arras.' The Quartos of 1676, 1683,
1695 and 1703 give 'I'll here conceal my self.'

In the Quarto of 1603 there is also a trace of the following speech of
Hamlet, omitted in the subsequent Quartos but given in the Folios.


NOTE XXI.

III. 4. 51, 52. This speech is properly given to the Queen in the
Folios, but is printed as prose. The second Quarto has:

    '_Quee._ Ay me, what act?

    _Ham._ That roares so low'd, and thunders in the Index,
    Looke heere &c.'

This is followed by the subsequent Quartos, except the sixth, which has
a colon at 'Index.' Warburton adopts the distribution of the Quartos,
but alters the second line thus:

    '_Ham._  That roars so loud, it thunders to the Indies.'


NOTE XXII.

III. 4. 71. The reading 'stoop' for 'step' is found in manuscript in
the margin of a copy of the Quarto of 1637, which has been kindly lent
us by Dr Ingleby. The other readings in this play referred to as 'Anon.
conj. MS.' or 'Anon. MS.' are from the same source.


NOTE XXIII.

IV. 1. 40--44. In the second and third Quartos these lines stand
literatim as follows:

    'And whats vntimely doone,
    Whose whisper ore the worlds dyameter,
    As leuell as the Cannon to his blanck,
    Transports his poysned shot, may misse our Name,
    And hit the woundlesse ayre, ô come away,
    My soule &c.'

The later Quartos, including those of 1676, 1683, 1695, and 1703,
spelling apart, have the same reading.

In the first Folio, followed substantially by the rest, we find only
these words:

    'And what's vntimely done. Oh come away,
    My soule &c.'

Rowe, Pope, Hanmer and Warburton followed the Folios.

Theobald first adopted the text of the Quartos. In his _Shakespeare
Restored_, p. 108, he had suggested 'Happily, slander,' or 'Happily,
rumour;' in his edition he supplied the blank thus:

    'And what's untimely done. For, haply, Slander
    (Whose whisper &c.'

Hanmer, in his copy of Theobald's edition, erased the passage with a
pen.

Johnson, and Steevens in his editions of 1773, 1778 and 1785, followed
Theobald.

Capell filled the hiatus by '_So_, haply, slander,' and was followed
by Steevens (1793) and most modern editors. Mason seems not to have
consulted Capell's edition, for in 1788 he puts forward this reading as
a conjecture of his own.

Malone (1790) read: 'So viperous slander.'

Mr Staunton proposes 'Thus calumny,' but in his text follows Capell.

'Malice' or 'Envy,' in the sense in which it is often used by
Shakespeare, would suit the passage as well as 'Slander.'


NOTE XXIV.

IV. 2. 1--3. The second and third Quartos begin the scene thus:

    '_Ham._ Safely stowd, but soft, what noyse, who calls on _Hamlet?_'

The fourth and fifth have 'softly' for 'soft.'

The Folios have:

    '_Ham._ Safely stowed.

    _Gentlemen within._ _Hamlet_, Lord _Hamlet_.

    _Ham._ What noise? Who cals on _Hamlet_?'

In the players' Quarto of 1676, and the following editions, which
otherwise adhere to the reading of the old Quartos, the words 'but
soft' are omitted. They omit also 'on'.

Capell gives:

    'HAM.---- Safely stow'd. But, soft;

    ROS. &c. [_within._] _Hamlet!_ lord _Hamlet!_

    HAM. What noise? who calls on _Hamlet_? O, here they come.'

The arrangement adopted in our text was first given by Malone.


NOTE XXV.

IV. 5. 14--16. The Quartos have:

    '_Hora._ Twere good she were spoken with, for shee may strew
    Dangerous coniectures in ill breeding mindes,
    Let her come in.'

The Folios,

    '_Qu._ 'Twere good she were spoken with,
    For she may strew dangerous coniectures
    In ill breeding minds. Let her come in.'

Rowe followed the Folios; Pope, Theobald, Warburton and Capell, the
Quartos. Hanmer continues the lines ''Twere good ... minds' to the
Gentleman who had spoken the previous lines, and gives 'Let her come
in &c.' to the Queen. Johnson follows Hanmer's distribution of the
speeches, but substitutes 'Hor.' for 'Gent.' in lines 2 and 4; the
arrangement proposed by Blackstone. Steevens (1773) assigned the speech
''Twere good ... spilt' (14--20) to Horatio, but restored it to the
Queen in his next edition. Mr Grant White follows the Folios in giving
the whole Speech to the Queen, but marks ''Twere good ... minds' as
spoken aside, and 'Let ... in' 'To Hor.'


NOTE XXVI.

IV. 5. 148. In the Quartos the passage is thus printed:

                                                     '_A noyse within._

                            _Enter Ophelia._

    _Laer._ Let her come in.
    How now, what noyse is that?'

In the Folios:

                                    '_A noise within. Let her come in._

                            _Enter Ophelia._

    _Laer._ How now? what noise is that?'

Rowe followed the Folios, Pope the Quartos, reading 'Let ... that?'
as one line. Theobald first transferred the stage direction, _Enter
Ophelia_, to follow the first line of Laertes's speech.


NOTE XXVII.

IV. 5. 163. Capell was the first to print these words as not forming
part of the song. In the Folios they are printed like the former
lines in italics. As there is no change of type in the Quartos, it is
impossible to say on which side their authority is. There is a comma
after 'teare' (or 'tear') in all the Quartos and Folios, except the
sixth Quarto, which has a full stop.


NOTE XXVIII.

IV. 5. 166. Ophelia's speech, or song, is printed as three lines in the
Quarto, thus:

    '_Oph._ You must sing a downe a downe,
    And you call him a downe a. O how the wheele becomes it,
    It is the false Steward that stole his Maisters daughter.'

It is printed as prose in the Folios; beginning, 'You must sing downe
a-downe, &c.' There is no indication that any part was meant to be sung.

Johnson first printed 'You must sing ... call him a-down-a' in italics,
as a snatch of song. Steevens (1778) put 'Down a down, as you call
him a-down-a' in italics, a reading suggested by Capell's text, where
'Down' begins with a capital letter. The late Mr John Taylor, in a
copy of the second Variorum edition (1813) now in the Library of
Trinity College, Cambridge, has made the following note. "Ophelia
gives the song without the Burthen first, and then she instructs them
'You must sing _a-down a-down_, and you (speaking to another) call him
_a-down-a_."


NOTE XXIX.

IV. 5. 195. In the Folios Ophelia's song is printed in Italics, and the
words 'And ... you' in Roman type, 'God buy ye' being in a separate
line. In the second and third Quartos the whole is printed in Roman
type, and ends thus:

    'God a mercy on his soule, and of all Christians soules,
    God buy you.'

We have indicated in the foot-note how the later Quartos differ from
the earlier.


NOTE XXX.

IV. 7. 139. Pope in his second edition says that 'one edition has it,
_embaited_ or envenomed.' We have not been able to find this reading
in any copy, but Theobald (_Shakespeare Restored_, p. 119) conjectured
'imbaited.' As this conjecture is not mentioned in his edition, we have
here, as in other cases, recorded it as 'withdrawn.'


NOTE XXXI.

V. 1. 57, 58. Mr Collier in his first edition conjectured that
'Yaughan' might be 'a mis-spelt stage direction to inform the player
that he was to _yawn_ at this point.' Mr Staunton says, "Whether by
'Yaughan' a man or place is meant, or whether the word is a corruption,
we are not qualified to determine." Mr Grant White says, "I suspect
that 'Yaughan' is a misprint for 'Tavern.' But some local allusion
understood at the day may lurk under it."


NOTE XXXII.

V. 2. 205, 206. The reading in the text is taken partly from the Folios
and partly from the Quartos, altering however the punctuation. The
second Quarto, followed substantially by the rest, has as follows:

    'The readines is all, since no man of ought he leaues, knowes what
    ist to leaue betimes, let be.'

The first Folio, followed, except in spelling, by the rest, has:

    _'The readinesse is all, since no man ha's ought of what he leaues.
    What is't to leaue betimes?'_

The Quartos of 1676, 1683, 1695 and 1703 have:

    'The readiness is all, since no man of ought he leaves knows what
    'tis to leave betimes, let be.'

Rowe, Pope and Theobald followed the Folios.

Hanmer:

    'The readiness is all. Since no man owes aught of what he leaves,
    what is't to leave betimes?'

Warburton:

    'The readiness is all. Since no man, of ought he leaves, knows,
    what is't to leave betimes? Let be.'

Johnson:

    'The readiness is all. Since no man knows aught of what he
    leaves, what is't to leave betimes?'

Steevens (1773, 1778, 1785) and Rann adopt the reading of Johnson,
adding the words 'Let be.'

Warburton's reading was followed by Capell, Malone, Steevens (1793),
the Editors of the three _Variorum Shakespeares_, 1803, 1813, 1821,
Singer, Harness and Mr Collier.

Caldecott first adopted the reading given in our text. Mr Grant White
follows him.

Becket would substitute 'has thought' for 'has aught.'

Mr Keightley prints thus, marking the sentence as unfinished:

    'The readiness is all. Since no man, of aught he leaves, knows
    what it is to leave betimes.... Let be.'


NOTE XXXIII.

V. 2. 290. Mr Staunton says, "The exclamation 'Ho!' meaning _stop_,
should perhaps be addressed to the combatants, and not, as it is always
printed, to those who are to raise the Queen."




The Tragicall Historie of

HAMLET

Prince of Denmarke.


[Sidenote: [SC. I.]]]

                         _Enter two Centinels._

    1. Stand: who is that?

    2. Tis I.

    1. O you come most carefully vpon your watch,

    2. And if you meete _Marcellus_ and _Horatio_,
    The partners of my watch, bid them make haste.                     5

    1. I will: See who goes there.

                     _Enter Horatio and Marcellus._

    _Hor._ Friends to this ground.

    _Mar._ And leegemen to the Dane,
    O farewell honest souldier, who hath releeued you?

    1. _Barnardo_ hath my place, giue you good night.                 10

    _Mar._ Holla, _Barnardo_.

    2. Say, is _Horatio_ there?

    _Hor._ A peece of him.

    2. Welcome _Horatio_, welcome good _Marcellus_.

    _Mar._ What hath this thing appear'd againe to night.             15

    2. I haue seene nothing.

    _Mar._ _Horatio_ sayes tis but our fantasie,
    And wil not let beliefe take hold of him,
    Touching this dreaded sight twice seene by vs,
    Therefore I haue intreated him a long with vs                     20
    To watch the minutes of this night,
    That if againe this apparition come,
    He may approoue our eyes, and speake to it.

    _Hor._ Tut, t'will not appeare.

    2. Sit downe I pray, and let vs once againe                       25
    Assaile your eares that are so fortified,
    What we haue two nights seene.

    _Hor._  Wel, sit we downe, and let vs heare _Bernardo_ speake
    of this.

    2. Last night of al, when yonder starre that's westward           30
    from the pole, had made his course to
    Illumine that part of heauen. Where now it burnes,
    The bell then towling one.

                             _Enter Ghost._

    _Mar._ Breake off your talke, see where it comes againe.

    2. In the same figure like the King that's dead,                  35

    _Mar._  Thou art a scholler, speake to it _Horatio_.

    2. Lookes it not like the king?

    _Hor._ Most like, it horrors mee with feare and wonder.

    2. It would be spoke to.

    _Mar._ Question it _Horatio_.                                     40

    _Hor._ What art thou that thus vsurps the state, in
    Which the Maiestie of buried _Denmarke_ did sometimes
    Walke? By heauen I charge thee speake.

    _Mar._ It is offended.      _exit Ghost._

    2. See, it stalkes away.                                          45

    _Hor._ Stay, speake, speake, by heauen I charge thee
    speake.

    _Mar._ Tis gone and makes no answer.

    2. How now _Horatio_, you tremble and looke pale,
    Is not this something more than fantasie?                         50
    What thinke you on't?

    _Hor._ Afore my God, I might not this beleeue, without
    the sensible and true auouch of my owne eyes.

    _Mar._ Is it not like the King?

    _Hor._ As thou art to thy selfe,                                  55
    Such was the very armor he had on,
    When he the ambitious _Norway_ combated.
    So frownd he once, when in an angry parle
    He smot the sleaded pollax on the yce,
    Tis strange.                                                      60

    _Mar._ Thus twice before, and iump at this dead hower,
    With Marshall stalke he passed through our watch.

    _Hor._ In what particular to worke, I know not,
    But in the thought and scope of my opinion,
    This bodes some strange eruption to the state.                    65

    _Mar._ Good, now sit downe, and tell me he that knowes
    Why this same strikt and most obseruant watch,
    So nightly toyles the subiect of the land,
    And why such dayly cost of brazen Cannon
    And forraine marte, for implements of warre,                      70
    Why such impresse of ship-writes, whose sore taske
    Does not diuide the sunday from the weeke:
    What might be toward that this sweaty march
    Doth make the night ioynt labourer with the day,
    Who is't that can informe me?                                     75

    _Hor._ Mary that can I, at least the whisper goes so,
    Our late King, who as you know was by Forten-Brasse
    of _Norway_,
    Thereto prickt on by a most emulous cause, dared to
    The combate, in which our valiant _Hamlet_,                       80
    For so this side of our knowne world esteemed him,
    Did slay this Fortenbrasse,
    Who by a seale compact well ratified, by law
    And heraldrie, did forfeit with his life all those
    His lands which he stoode seazed of by the conqueror,             85
    Against the which a moity competent,
    Was gaged by our King:
    Now sir, yong Fortenbrasse,
    Of inapproued mettle hot and full,
    Hath in the skirts of _Norway_ here and there,                    90
    Sharkt vp a sight of lawlesse Resolutes
    For food and diet to some enterprise,
    That hath a stomacke in't: and this (I take it) is the
    Chiefe head and ground of this our watch.

                           _Enter the Ghost._

    But loe, behold, see where it comes againe,                       95
    Ile crosse it, though it blast me: stay illusion,
    If there be any good thing to be done,
    That may doe ease to thee, and grace to mee,
    Speake to mee.
    If thou art priuy to thy countries fate,                         100
    Which happly foreknowing may preuent, O speake to me,
    Or if thou hast extorted in thy life,
    Or hoorded treasure in the wombe of earth,
    For which they say you Spirites oft walke in death, speake
    to me, stay and speake, speake, stoppe it _Marcellus_.           105

    2. Tis heere.        _exit Ghost._

    _Hor._ Tis heere.

    _Marc._ Tis gone, O we doe it wrong, being so maiesticall,
    to offer it the shew of violence,
    For it is as the ayre invelmorable,                              110
    And our vaine blowes malitious mockery.

    2. It was about to speake when the Cocke crew.

    _Hor._ And then it faded like a guilty thing,
    Vpon a fearefull summons: I haue heard
    The Cocke, that is the trumpet to the morning,                   115
    Doth with his earely and shrill crowing throate,
    Awake the god of day, and at his sound,
    Whether in earth or ayre, in sea or fire,
    The strauagant and erring spirite hies
    To his confines, and of the trueth heereof                       120
    This present obiect made probation.

    _Marc._ It faded on the crowing of the Cocke,
    Some say, that euer gainst that season comes,
    Wherein our Sauiours birth is celebrated,
    The bird of dawning singeth all night long,                      125
    And then they say, no spirite dare walke abroade,
    The nights are wholesome, then no planet frikes,
    No Fairie takes, nor Witch hath powre to charme,
    So gratious, and so hallowed is that time.

    _Hor._ So haue I heard, and doe in parte beleeue it:             130
    But see the Sunne in russet mantle clad,
    Walkes ore the deaw of yon his mountaine top,
    Breake we our watch vp, and by my aduise,
    Let vs impart what wee haue seene to night
    Vnto yong _Hamlet_: for vpon my life                             135
    This Spirite dumbe to vs will speake to him:
    Do you consent, wee shall acquaint him with it,
    As needefull in our loue, fitting our duetie?

    _Marc._ Lets doo't I pray, and I this morning know,
    Where we shall finde him most conueniently.                      140

            _Enter King, Queene, Hamlet, Leartes, Corambis,
               and the two Ambassadors, with Attendants._


[Sidenote: [SC. II.]]

    _King_ Lordes, we here haue writ to _Fortenbrasse_,
    Nephew to olde _Norway_, who impudent
    And bed-rid, scarcely heares of this his
    Nephews purpose: and Wee heere dispatch
    Yong good _Cornelia_, and you _Voltemar_                           5
    For bearers of these greetings to olde
    _Norway_, giuing to you no further personall power
    To businesse with the King,
    Then those related articles do shew:
    Farewell, and let your haste commend your dutie.                  10

    _Gent._ In this and all things will wee shew our dutie.

    _King._ Wee doubt nothing, hartily farewel:
    And now _Leartes_ what's the newes with you?[2422]
    You said you had a sute what i'st _Leartes_?

    _Lea._ My gratious Lord, your fauorable licence,                  15
    Now that the funerall rites are all performed,
    I may haue leaue to go againe to _France_,
    For though the fauour of your grace might stay mee,
    Yet something is there whispers in my hart,
    Which makes my minde and spirits bend all for _France_.           20

    _King_ Haue you your fathers leaue, _Leartes_?

    _Cor._ He hath, my lord, wrung from me a forced graunt,
    And I beseech you grant your Highnesse leaue.

    _King_ With all our heart, _Leartes_ fare thee well.

    _Lear._ I in all loue and dutie take my leaue.                    25

    _King._ And now princely Sonne _Hamlet_,         _Exit._
    What meanes these sad and melancholy moodes?
    For your intent going to _Wittenberg_,
    Wee hold it most vnmeet and vnconuenient,
    Being the Ioy and halfe heart of your mother.                     30
    Therefore let mee intreat you stay in Court,
    All _Denmarkes_ hope our coosin and dearest Sonne.

    _Ham._ My lord, ti's not the sable sute I weare:
    No nor the teares that still stand in my eyes,
    Nor the distracted hauiour in the visage,                         35
    Nor all together mixt with outward semblance,
    Is equall to the sorrow of my heart,
    Him haue I lost I must of force forgoe,
    These but the ornaments and sutes of woe.

    _King_ This shewes a louing care in you, Sonne _Hamlet_,          40
    But you must thinke your father lost a father,
    That father dead, lost his, and so shalbe vntill the
    Generall ending. Therefore cease laments,
    It is a fault gainst heauen, fault gainst the dead,
    A fault gainst nature, and in reasons                             45
    Common course most certaine,
    None liues on earth, but hee is borne to die.

    _Que._ Let not thy mother loose her praiers _Hamlet_,
    Stay here with vs, go not to _Wittenberg_.

    _Ham._ I shall in all my best obay you madam.                     50

    _King_ Spoke like a kinde and a most louing Sonne,
    And there's no health the King shall drinke to day,
    But the great Canon to the clowdes shall tell
    The rowse the King shall drinke vnto Prince _Hamlet_.

                        _Exeunt all but Hamlet._

    _Ham._ O that this too much grieu'd and sallied flesh             55
    Would melt to nothing, or that the vniuersall
    Globe of heauen would turne al to a Chaos!
    O God within two moneths; no not two: maried,[2423]
    Mine vncle: O let me not thinke of it,
    My fathers brother: but no more like
    My father, then I to _Hercules_.
    Within two months, ere yet the salt of most
    Vnrighteous teates had left their flushing
    In her galled eyes: she married, O God, a beast
    Deuoyd of reason would not haue made                              65
    Such speede: Frailtie, thy name is Woman,
    Why she would hang on him, as if increase
    Of appetite had growne by what it looked on.
    O wicked wicked speede, to make such
    Dexteritie to incestuous sheetes,                                 70
    Ere yet the shooes were olde,
    The which she followed my dead fathers corse
    Like _Nyobe_, all teares: married, well it is not,
    Nor it cannot come to good:
    But breake my heart, for I must holde my tongue.                  75

                    _Enter_ Horatio _and_ Marcellus.

    _Hor._ Health to your Lordship.

    _Ham._ I am very glad to see you, (Horatio) or I much
    forget my selfe.

    _Hor._ The same my Lord, and your poore seruant euer.

    _Ham._ O my good friend, I change that name with you:             80
    but what make you from _Wittenberg_ _Horatio_?
    _Marcellus._

    _Marc._ My good Lord.

    _Ham._ I am very glad to see you, good euen sirs:
    But what is your affaire in _Elsenoure_?                          85
    Weele teach you to drinke deepe ere you depart.

    _Hor._ A trowant disposition, my good Lord.

    _Ham._ Nor shall you make mee truster
    Of your owne report against your selfe:
    Sir, I know you are no trowant:                                   90
    But what is your affaire in _Elsenoure_?

    _Hor._ My good Lord, I came to see your fathers funerall.

    _Ham._ O I pre thee do not mocke mee fellow studient,
    I thinke it was to see my mothers wedding.

    _Hor._ Indeede my Lord, it followed hard vpon.                    95

    _Ham._ Thrift, thrift, _Horatio_, the funerall bak't meates
    Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables,
    Would I had met my deerest foe in heauen
    Ere euer I had seene that day _Horatio_;
    O my father, my father, me thinks I see my father,               100

    _Hor._ Where my Lord?

    _Ham._ Why, in my mindes eye _Horatio_.

    _Hor._ I saw him once, he was a gallant King.

    _Ham._ He was a man, take him for all in all,
    I shall not looke vpon his like againe.

    _Hor._ My Lord, I thinke I saw him yesternight,

    _Ham._ Saw, who?

    _Hor._ My Lord, the King your father.

    _Ham._ Ha, ha, the King my father ke you.

    _Hor._ Ceasen your admiration for a while                        110
    With an attentiue eare, till I may deliuer,
    Vpon the witnesse of these Gentlemen
    This wonder to you.

    _Ham._ For Gods loue let me heare it.

    _Hor._ Two nights together had these Gentlemen,                  115
    _Marcellus_ and _Bernardo_, on their watch,
    In the dead vast and middle of the night.
    Beene thus incountered by a figure like your father,
    Armed to poynt, exactly _Capapea_
    Appeeres before them thrise, he walkes                           120
    Before their weake and feare oppressed eies.
    Within his tronchions length,
    While they distilled almost to gelly.
    With the act of feare stands dumbe,
    And speake not to him: this to mee                               125
    In dreadfull secresie impart they did.
    And I with them the third night kept the watch,
    Where as they had deliuered forme of the thing.
    Each part made true and good,
    The Apparition comes: I knew your father,                        130
    These handes are not more like.

    _Ham._ Tis very strange.

    _Hor._ As I do liue, my honord lord, tis true,
    And wee did thinke it right done,
    In our dutie to let you know it.                                 135

    _Ham._ Where was this?

    _Mar._ My Lord, vpon the platforme where we watched.

    _Ham._ Did you not speake to it?

    _Hor._ My Lord we did, but answere made it none,
    Yet once me thought it was about to speake,                      140
    And lifted vp his head to motion,
    Like as he would speake, but euen then
    The morning cocke crew lowd, and in all haste,
    It shruncke in haste away, and vanished
    Our sight.                                                       145

    _Ham._ Indeed, indeed sirs, but this troubles me:
    Hold you the watch to night?

    _All_ We do my Lord.

    _Ham._ Armed say ye?

    _All_ Armed my good Lord.                                        150

    _Ham._ From top to toe?

    _All._ My good Lord, from head to foote.

    _Ham._ Why then saw you not his face?

    _Hor._ O yes my Lord, he wore his beuer vp.

    _Ham._ How look't he, frowningly?                                155

    _Hor._ A countenance more in sorrow than in anger.

    _Ham._ Pale, or red?

    _Hor._ Nay, verie pal

    _Ham._ And fixt his eies vpon you.

    _Hor._ Most constantly.                                          160

    _Ham._ I would I had beene there.

    _Hor._ It would a much amazed you.

    _Ham._ Yea very like, very like, staid it long?

    _Hor._ While one with moderate pace
    Might tell a hundred.                                            165

    _Mar._ O longer, longer.

    _Ham._ His beard was grisleld, no.

    _Hor._ It was as I haue seene it in his life,
    A sable siluer.

    _Ham._ I wil watch to night, perchance t'wil walke againe.       170

    _Hor._ I warrant it will.

    _Ham._ If it assume my noble fathers person,
    Ile speake to it, if hell it selfe should gape,
    And bid me hold my peace, Gentlemen,
    If you haue hither consealed this sight,                         175
    Let it be tenible in your silence still,
    And whatsoeuer else shall chance to night,
    Giue it an vnderstanding, but no tongue,
    I will requit your loues, so fare you well,
    Vpon the platforme, twixt eleuen and twelue,                     180
    Ile visit you.

    _All._ Our duties to your honor.        _exeunt._

    _Ham._ O your loues, your loues, as mine to you,
    Farewell, my fathers spirit in Armes,
    Well, all's not well. I doubt some foule play,                   185
    Would the night were come,
    Till then, sit still my soule, foule deeds will rise
    Though all the world orewhelme them to mens eies.        _Exit._


[Sidenote: [SC. III.]]

                     _Enter Leartes_ and _Ofelia_.

    _Leart._ My necessaries are inbarkt, I must aboord,
    But ere I part, marke what I say to thee:
    I see Prince _Hamlet_ makes a shew of loue
    Beware _Ofelia_, do not trust his vowes,
    Perhaps he loues you now, and now his tongue,                      5
    Speakes from his heart, but yet take heed my sister,
    The Chariest maide is prodigall enough,
    If she vnmaske hir beautie to the Moone.
    Vertue it selfe scapes not calumnious thoughts,
    Belieu't _Ofelia_, therefore keepe a loofe                        10
    Lest that he trip thy honor and thy fame.

    _Ofel._ Brother, to this I haue lent attentiue eare,
    And doubt not but to keepe my honour firme,
    But my deere brother, do not you
    Like to a cunning Sophister,                                      15
    Teach me the path and ready way to heauen,
    While you forgetting what is said to me,
    Your selfe, like to a carelesse libertine
    Doth giue his heart, his appetite at ful,
    And little recks how that his honour dies.                        20

    _Lear._ No, feare it not my deere _Ofelia_,
    Here comes my father, occasion smiles vpon a second leaue.

                           _Enter Corambis._

    _Cor._ Yet here _Leartes_? aboord, aboord, for shame,
    The winde sits in the shoulder of your saile,
    And you are staid for, there my blessing with thee                25
    And these few precepts in thy memory.
    "Be thou familiar, but by no meanes vulgare;
    "Those friends thou hast, and their adoptions tried,
    "Graple them to thee with a hoope of steele,
    "But do not dull the palme with entertaine,                       30
    "Of euery new vnfleg'd courage,
    "Beware of entrance into a quarrell; but being in,
    "Beare it that the opposed may beware of thee,
    "Costly thy apparrell, as thy purse can buy.
    "But not exprest in fashion,                                      35
    "For the apparell oft proclaimes the man."
    And they of _France_ of the chiefe rancke and station
    Are of a most select and generall chiefe in that:
    "This aboue all, to thy owne selfe be true,
    And it must follow as the night the day,                          40
    Thou canst not then be false to any one,
    Farewel, my blessing with thee.

    _Lear._ I humbly take my leaue, farewell _Ofelia_,
    And remember well what I haue said to you.        _exit._

    _Ofel._ It is already lock't within my hart,                      45
    And you your selfe shall keepe the key of it.

    _Cor._ What i'st _Ofelia_ he hath saide to you?

    _Ofel._ Somthing touching the prince _Hamlet_.

    _Cor._ Mary wel thought on, t'is giuen me to vnderstand,
    That you haue bin too prodigall of your maiden presence           50
    Vnto Prince Hamlet, if it be so,
    As so tis giuen to mee, and that in waie of caution
    I must tell you; you do not vnderstand your selfe
    So well as befits my honor, and your credite.

    _Ofel._ My lord, he hath made many tenders of his loue            55
    to me.

    _Cor._ Tenders, I, I, tenders you may call them.

    _Ofel._ And withall, such earnest vowes.

    _Cor._ Springes to catch woodcocks,
    What, do not I know when the blood doth burne,                    60
    How prodigall the tongue lends the heart vowes,
    In briefe, be more scanter of your maiden presence,
    Or tendring thus you'l tender mee a foole.

    _Ofel._ I shall obay my lord in all I may.

    _Cor._ _Ofelia_, receiue none of his letters,                     65
    "For louers lines are snares to intrap the heart;
    "Refuse his tokens, both of them are keyes
    To vnlocke Chastitie vnto Desire;
    Come in _Ofelia_, such men often proue,
    "Great in their wordes, but little in their loue."                70

    _Ofel._ I will my lord.        _exeunt._


[Sidenote: [SC. IV.]]

               _Enter_ Hamlet, Horatio, _and_ Marcellus.

    _Ham._ The ayre bites shrewd; it is an eager and
    An nipping winde, what houre i'st?

    _Hor._ I think it lacks of twelue.           _Sound Trumpets._

    _Mar._ No, t'is strucke.

    _Hor._ Indeed I heard it not, what doth this mean my lord?         5

    _Ham._ O the king doth wake to night, & takes his rowse,
    Keepe wassel, and the swaggering vp-spring reeles,
    And as he dreames, his draughts of renish downe,
    The kettle, drumme, and trumpet, thus bray out,
    The triumphes of his pledge.                                      10

    _Hor._ Is it a custome here?

    _Ham._ I mary i'st and though I am
    Natiue here, and to the maner borne,
    It is a custome, more honourd in the breach,
    Then in the obseruance.                                           15

                           _Enter the Ghost._

    _Hor._ Looke my Lord, it comes.

    _Ham._ Angels and Ministers of grace defend vs,
    Be thou a spirite of health, or goblin damn'd,
    Bring with thee ayres from heauen, or blasts from hell:
    Be thy intents wicked or charitable,                              20
    Thou commest in such questionable shape,
    That I will speake to thee,
    Ile call thee _Hamlet_, King, Father, Royall Dane,
    O answere mee, let mee not burst in ignorance,
    But say why thy canonizd bones hearsed in death                   25
    Haue burst their ceremonies: why thy Sepulcher,
    In which wee saw thee quietly interr'd.
    Hath burst his ponderous and marble Iawes,
    To cast thee vp againe: what may this meane,
    That thou, dead corse, againe in compleate steele,                30
    Reuissets thus the glimses of the Moone,
    Making night hideous, and we fooles of nature,
    So horridely to shake our disposition,
    With thoughts beyond the reaches of our soules?
    Say, speake, wherefore, what may this meane?                      35

    _Hor._ It beckons you, as though it had something
    To impart to you alone.

    _Mar._ Looke with what courteous action
    It waues you to a more remoued ground,
    But do not go with it.                                            40

    _Hor._ No, by no meanes my Lord.

    _Ham._ It will not speake, then will I follow it.

    _Hor._ What if it tempt you toward the flood my Lord.
    That beckles ore his bace, into the sea,
    And there assume some other horrible shape,                       45
    Which might depriue your soueraigntie of reason,
    And driue you into madnesse: thinke of it.

    _Ham._ Still am I called, go on, ile follow thee.

    _Hor._ My Lord, you shall not go.

    _Ham._ Why what should be the feare?                              50
    I do not set my life at a pinnes fee,
    And for my soule, what can it do to that?
    Being a thing immortall, like it selfe,
    Go on, ile follow thee.

    _Mar._ My Lord be rulde, you shall not goe.                       55

    _Ham._ My fate cries out, and makes each pety Artiue
    As hardy as the Nemeon Lyons nerue,
    Still am I cald, vnhand me gentlemen;
    By heauen ile make a ghost of him that lets me,
    Away I say, go on, ile follow thee.                               60

    _Hor._ He waxeth desperate with imagination.

    _Mar._ Something is rotten in the state of _Denmarke_.

    _Hor._ Haue after; to what issue will this sort?

    _Mar._ Lets follow, tis not fit thus to obey him.        _exit._

                       _Enter Ghost and Hamlet._

    _Ham._ Ile go no farther, whither wilt thou leade me?             65

    _Ghost_ Marke me.

    _Ham._ I will.

    _Ghost_ I am thy fathers spirit, doomd for a time
    To walke the night, and all the day
    Confinde in flaming fire,                                         70
    Till the foule crimes done in my dayes of Nature
    Arepurged and burnt away.

    _Ham._ Alas poore Ghost.

    _Ghost_ Nay pitty me not, but to my vnfolding
    Lend thy listning eare, but that I am forbid                      75
    To tell the secrets of my prison house
    I would a tale vnfold, whose lightest word
    Would harrow vp thy soule, freeze thy yong blood,
    Make thy two eyes like stars start from their spheres,
    Thy knotted and combined locks to part,                           80
    And each particular haire to stand on end
    Like quils vpon the fretfull Porpentine,
    But this same blazon must not be, to eares of flesh and blood
    Hamlet, if euer thou didst thy deere father loue.

    _Ham._ O God.                                                     85

    _Gho._ Reuenge his foule, and most vnnaturall murder:

    _Ham._ Murder.

    _Ghost_ Yea, murder in the highest degree,
    As in the least tis bad,
    But mine most foule, beastly, and vnnaturall.                     90

    _Ham._ Haste me to knowe it, that with wings as swift as
    meditation, or the thought of it, may sweepe to my reuenge.

    _Ghost_ O I finde thee apt, and duller shouldst thou be
    Then the fat weede which rootes it selfe in ease
    On _Lethe_ wharffe: briefe let me be.                             95
    Tis giuen out, that sleeping in my orchard,
    A Serpent stung me; so the whole eare of _Denmarke_
    Is with a forged Prosses of my death rankely abusde:
    But know thou noble Youth: he that did sting
    Thy fathers heart, now weares his Crowne.                        100

    _Ham._ O my prophetike soule, my vncle! my vncle!

    _Ghost_ Yea he, that incestuous wretch, wonne to his will with gifts,
    O wicked will, and gifts! that haue the power
    So to seduce my most seeming vertuous Queene,
    But vertne, as it neuer will be moued,                           105
    Though Lewdnesse court it in a shape of heauen,
    So Lust, though to a radiant angle linckt,
    Would fate it selfe from a celestiall bedde,
    And prey on garbage: but soft, me thinkes
    I sent the mornings ayre, briefe let me be,                      110
    Sleeping within my Orchard, my custome alwayes
    In the after noone, vpon my secure houre
    Thy vncle came, with iuyce of Hebona
    In a viall, and through the porches of my eares
    Did powre the leaprous distilment, whose effect                  115
    Hold such an enmitie with blood of man,
    That swift as quickesiluer, it posteth through
    The naturall gates and allies of the body,
    And turnes the thinne and wholesome blood
    Like eager dropings into milke.                                  120
    And all my smoothe body, barked, and tetterd ouer.
    Thus was I sleeping by a brothers hand
    Of Crowne, of Queene, of life, of dignitie
    At once depriued, no reckoning made of,
    But sent vnto my graue,                                          125
    With all my accompts and sinnes vpon my head,
    O horrible, most horrible!

    _Ham._ O God!

    _Ghost_ If thou hast nature in thee, beare it not,
    But howsoeuer, let not thy heart                                 130
    Conspire against thy mother aught,
    Leaue her to heauen,
    And to the burthen that her conscience beares.
    I must be gone, the Glo-worme shewes the Martin
    To be neere, and gin's to pale his vneffectuall fire:            135
    Hamlet adue, adue, adue: remember me.                        [_Exit_

    _Ham._ O all you hoste of heauen! O earth, what else?
    And shall I couple hell; remember thee?
    Yes thou poore Ghost; from the tables
    Of my memorie, ile wipe away all sawes of Bookes,                140
    All triuiall fond conceites
    That euer youth, or else obseruance noted,
    And thy remembrance, all alone shall sit.
    Yes, yes, by heauen, a damnd pernitious villaine,
    Murderons, bawdy, smiling damned villaine,                       145
    (My tables) meet it is I set it downe,
    That one may smile, and smile, and be a villayne;
    At least I am sure, it may be so in _Denmarke_.
    So vncle, there you are, there you are.
    Now to the words; it is adue adue: remember me,                  150
    Soe t'is enough I haue sworne.

    _Hor._ My lord, my lord.      _Enter. Horatio, and Marcellus._

    _Mar._ Lord Hamlet.

    _Hor._ Ill, lo, lo, ho, ho.

    _Mar._ Ill, lo, lo, so, ho, so, come boy, come.                  155

    _Hor._ Heauens secure him.

    _Mar._ How i'st my noble lord?

    _Hor._ What news my lord?

    _Ham._ O wonderfull, wonderful.

    _Hor._ Good my lord tel it.                                      160

    _Ham._ No not I, you'l reueale it.

    _Hor._ Not I my Lord by heauen.

    _Mar._ Nor I my Lord.

    _Ham._ How say you then? would hart of man
    Once thinke it? but you'l be secret.                             165

    _Both._ I by heauen, my lord.

    _Ham._ There's neuer a villaine dwelling in all _Denmarke_,
    But hee's an arrant knaue.

    _Hor._ There need no Ghost come from the graue to tell
    you this.                                                        170

    _Ham._ Right, you are in the right, and therefore
    I holde it meet without more circumstance at all,
    Wee shake hands and part; you as your busines
    And desiers shall leade you: for looke you,
    Euery man hath busines, and desires, such                        175
    As it is, and for my owne poore parte, ile go pray.

    _Hor._ These are but wild and wherling words, my Lord.

    _Ham._ I am sory they offend you; hartely, yes faith hartily.

    _Hor._ Ther's no offence my Lord.

    _Ham._ Yes by Saint _Patrike_ but there is _Horatio_,            180
    And much offence too, touching this vision,
    It is an honest ghost, that let mee tell you,
    For your desires to know what is betweene vs,
    Or'emaister it as you may:
    And now kind frends, as yon are frends,                          185
    Schollers and gentlmen,
    Grant mee one poore request.

    _Both._ What i'st my Lord?

    _Ham._ Neuer make known what you haue seene to night

    _Both._ My Lord, we will not.                                    190

    _Ham._ Nay but sweare.

    _Hor._ In faith my Lord not I.

    _Mar._ Nor I my Lord in faith.

    _Ham._ Nay vpon my sword, indeed vpon my sword.

    _Gho._ Sweare.                                                   195

                      _The Gost vnder the stage._

    _Ham._ Ha, ha, come you here, this fellow in the sellerige,
    Here consent to sweare.

    _Hor._ Propose the oth my Lord.

    _Ham._ Neuer to speake what you haue seene to night,
    Sweare by my sword.                                              200

    _Gost._ Sweare.

    _Ham._ _Hic & vbique_; nay then weele shift our ground:
    Come hither Gentlemen, and lay your handes
    Againe vpon this sword, neuer to speake
    Of that which you haue seene, sweare by my sword.                205

    _Ghost_ Sweare.

    _Ham._ Well said old Mole, can'st worke in the earth?
    so fast, a worthy Pioner, once more remoue.

    _Hor._ Day and night, but this is wondrous strange.

    _Ham._ And therefore as a stranger giue it welcome,              210
    There are more things in heauen and earth _Horatio_,
    Then are Dream't of, in your philosophie,
    But come here, as before you neuer shall
    How strange or odde soere I beare my selfe,
    As I perchance hereafter shall thinke meet,                      215
    To put an Anticke disposition on,
    That you at such times seeing me, neuer shall
    With Armes, incombred thus, or this head shake,
    Or by pronouncing some vndoubtfull phrase,
    As well well, wee know, or wee could and if we would,            220
    Or there be, and if they might, or such ambiguous:
    Giuing out to note, that you know aught of mee,
    This not to doe, so grace, and mercie
    At your most need helpe you, sweare

    _Ghost._ sweare.                                                 225

    _Ham._ Rest, rest, perturbed spirit: so gentlemen,
    In all my loue I do commend mee to you,
    And what so poore a man as _Hamlet_ may,
    To pleasure you, God willing shall not want,
    Nay come lett's go together,                                     230
    But stil your fingers on your lippes I pray,
    The time is out of ioynt, O cursed spite,
    That euer I was borne to set it right,
    Nay come lett's go together.        _Exeunt._


[Sidenote: [SC. V.]]

                     _Enter Corambis, and Montano._

    _Cor._ _Montano_, here, these letters to my sonne,
    And this same mony with my blessing to him,
    And bid him ply his learning good _Montano_.

    _Mon._ I will my lord.

    _Cor._ You shall do very well _Montano_, to say thus,              5
    I knew the gentleman, or know his father,
    To inquire the manner of his life,
    As thus; being amongst his acquaintance,
    You may say, you saw him at such a time, marke you mee,
    At game, or drincking, swearing, or drabbing,                     10
    You may go so farre.

    _Mon._ My lord, that will impeach his reputation.

    _Cor._ I faith not a whit, no not a whit,
    Now happely hee closeth with you in the consequence,
    As you may bridle it not disparage him a iote.                    15
    What was I a bout to say,

    _Mon._ He closeth with him in the consequence.

    _Cor._ I, you say right, he closeth with him thus,
    This will hee say, let mee see what hee will say,
    Mary this, I saw him yesterday, or tother day,                    20
    Or then, or at such a time, a dicing,
    Or at Tennis, I or drincking drunke, or entring
    Of a howse of lightnes viz. brothell,
    Thus sir do wee that know the world, being men of reach,
    By indirections, finde directions forth,                          25
    And so shall you my sonne; you ha me, ha you not?

    _Mon._ I haue my lord.

    _Cor._ Wel, fare you well, commend mee to him.

    _Mon._ I will my lord.

    _Cor._ And bid him ply his musicke                                30

    _Mon._ My lord I wil.      _exit._

                            _Enter, Ofelia._

    _Cor._ Farewel, how now _Ofelia_, what's the news with you?

    _Ofe._ O my deare father, such a change in nature,
    So great an alteration in a Prince,
    So pitifull to him, fearefull to mee,                             35
    A maidens eye ne're looked on.

    _Cor._ Why what's the matter my _Ofelia_?

    _Of._ O yong Prince _Hamlet_, the only floure of _Denmark_,
    Hee is bereft of all the wealth he had,
    The Iewell that ador'nd his feature most                          40
    Is filcht and stolne away, his wit's bereft him,
    Hee found mee walking in the gallery all alone,
    There comes hee to mee, with a distracted looke,
    His garters lagging downe, his shooes vntide,
    And fixt his eyes so stedfast on my face,                         45
    As if they had vow'd, this is their latest obiect.
    Small while he stoode, but gripes me by the wrist,
    And there he holdes my pulse till with a sigh
    He doth vnclaspe his holde, and parts away
    Silent, as is the mid time of the night:                          50
    And as he went, his eie was still on mee,
    For thus his head ouer his shoulder looked,
    He seemed to finde the way without his eies:
    For out of doores he went without their helpe,
    And so did leaue me.                                              55

    _Cor._ Madde for thy loue,
    What haue you giuen him any crosse wordes of late?

    _Ofelia_ I did repell his letters, deny his gifts,
    As you did charge me.

    _Cor._ Why that hath made him madde:                              60
    By heau'n t'is as proper for our age to cast
    Beyond our selues, as t'is for the yonger sort
    To leaue their wantonnesse. Well, I am sory
    That I was so rash: but what remedy?
    Lets to the King, this madnesse may prooue,                       65
    Though wilde a while, yet more true to thy loue.        _exeunt._


[Sidenote: [SC. VI.]]

         _Enter King and Queene, Rossencraft, and Gilderstone._

    _King_ Right noble friends, that our deere cosin Hamlet
    Hath lost the very heart of all his sence,
    It is most right, and we most sory for him:
    Therefore we doe desire, euen as you tender
    Our care to him, and our great loue to you,                        5
    That you will labour but to wring from him
    The cause and ground of his distemperancie.
    Doe this, the king of _Denmarke_ shal be thankefull.

    _Ros._ My Lord, whatsoeuer lies within our power
    Your maiestie may more commaund in wordes                         10
    Then vse perswasions to your liege men, bound
    By loue, by duetie, and obedience.

    _Guil._ What we may doe for both your Maiesties
    To know the griefe troubles the Prince your sonne,
    We will indeuour all the best we may,                             15
    So in all duetie doe we take our leaue.

    _King_ Thankes Guilderstone, and gentle Rossencraft.

    _Que._ Thankes Rossencraft, and gentle Gilderstone.

                      _Enter Corambis and Ofelia._

    _Cor._ My Lord, the Ambassadors are ioyfully
    Return'd from _Norway_.                                           20

    _King_ Thou still hast beene the father of good news.

    _Cor._ Haue I my Lord? I assure your grace,
    I holde my duetie as I holde my life,
    Both to my God, and to my soueraigne King:
    And I beleeue, or else this braine of mine                        25
    Hunts not the traine of policie so well
    As it had wont to doe, but I haue found
    The very depth of Hamlets lunacie.

    _Queene_ God graunt he hath.

                        _Enter the Ambassadors._

    _King_ Now _Voltemar_, what from our brother _Norway_?            30

    _Volt._ Most faire returnes of greetings and desires,
    Vpon our first he sent forth to suppresse
    His nephews leuies, which to him appear'd
    To be a preparation gainst the Polacke:
    But better look't into, he truely found                           35
    It was against your Highnesse, whereat grieued,
    That so his sickenesse, age, and impotence,
    Was falsely borne in hand, sends out arrests
    On _Fortenbrasse_, which he in briefe obays,
    Receiues rebuke from _Norway_: and in fine,                       40
    Makes vow before his vncle, neuer more
    To giue the assay of Armes against your Maiestie,
    Whereon olde _Norway_ ouercome with ioy,
    Giues him three thousand crownes in annuall fee,
    And his Commission to employ those souldiers,                     45
    So leuied as before, against the Polacke,
    With an intreaty heerein further shewne,
    That it would please you to giue quiet passe
    Through your dominions, for that enterprise
    On such regardes of safety and allowances                         50
    As therein are set downe.

    _King_ It likes vs well, and at fit time and leasure
    Weele reade and answere these his Articles,
    Meane time we thanke you for your well
    Tooke labour: go to your rest, at night weele feast togither:     55
    Right welcome home.             _exeunt Ambassadors._

    _Cor._ This busines is very well dispatched.
    Now my Lord, touching the yong Prince Hamlet,
    Certaine it is that hee is madde: mad let vs grant him then:
    Now to know the cause of this effect,                             60
    Or else to say the cause of this defect,
    For this effect defectiue comes by cause.

    _Queene_ Good my Lord be briefe.

    _Cor._ Madam I will: my Lord, I haue a daughter,
    Haue while shee's mine: for that we thinke                        65
    Is surest, we often loose: now to the Prince.
    My lord, but note this letter,
    The which my daughter in obedience
    Deliuer'd to my handes.

    _King_ Reade it my Lord.                                          70

    _Cor._ Marke my Lord.
    Doubt that in earth is fire,
    Doubt that the starres doe moue,
    Doubt trueth to be a liar,
    But doe not doubt I loue.                                         75
    To the beautifull _Ofelia_:
    Thine euer the most vnhappy Prince _Hamlet_.
    My Lord, what doe you thinke of me?
    I, or what might you thinke when I sawe this?

    _King_ As of a true friend and a most louing subiect.             80

    _Cor._ I would be glad to prooue so.
    Now when I saw this letter, thus I bespake my maiden:
    Lord _Hamlet_ is a Prince out of your starre,
    And one that is vnequall for your loue:
    Therefore I did commaund her refuse his letters,                  85
    Deny his tokens, and to absent her selfe.
    Shee as my childe obediently obey'd me.
    Now since which time, seeing his loue thus cross'd,
    Which I tooke to be idle, and but sport,
    He straitway grew into a melancholy,                              90
    From that vnto a fast, then vnto distraction,
    Then into a sadnesse, from that vnto a madnesse,
    And so by continuance, and weakenesse of the braine
    Into this frensie, which now possesseth him:
    And if this be not true, take this from this.                     95

    _King_ Thinke you t'is so?

    _Cor._ How? so my Lord, I would very faine know
    That thing that I haue saide t'is so, positiuely,
    And it hath fallen out otherwise.
    Nay, if circumstances leade me on,                               100
    Ile finde it out, if it were hid
    As deepe as the centre of the earth.

    _King._ How should wee trie this same?

    _Cor._ Mary my good lord thus,
    The Princes walke is here in the galery,                         105
    There let _Ofelia_, walke vntill hee comes:
    Your selfe and I will stand close in the study,
    There shall you heare the effect of all his hart,
    And if it proue any otherwise then loue,
    Then let my censure faile an other time.                         110

    _King._ see where hee comes poring vppon a booke.

                            _Enter Hamlet._

    _Cor._ Madame, will it please your grace
    To leaue vs here?

    _Que._ With all my hart.       _exit._

    _Cor._ And here _Ofelia_, reade you on this booke,               115
    And walke aloofe, the King shal be vnseene.

    _Ham._ To be, or not to be, I there's the point,
    To Die, to sleepe, is that all? I all:
    No, to sleepe, to dreame, I mary there it goes,                  120
    For in that dreame of death, when wee awake,
    And borne before an euerlasting Iudge,
    From whence no passenger euer retur'nd,
    The vndiscouered country, at whose sight
    The happy smile, and the accursed damn'd.                        125
    But for this, the ioyfull hope of this,
    Whol'd beare the scornes and flattery of the world,
    Scorned by the right rich, the rich curssed of the poore?
    The widow being oppressed, the orphan wrong'd,
    The taste of hunger, or a tirants raigne,                        130
    And thousand more calamities besides,
    To grunt and sweate vnder this weary life,
    When that he may his full _Quietus_ make,
    With a bare bodkin, who would this indure,
    But for a hope of something after death?
    Which pusles the braine, and doth confound the sence,            135
    Which makes vs rather beare those euilles we haue,
    Than flie to others that we know not of.
    I that, O this conscience makes cowardes of vs all,
    Lady in thy orizons, be all my sinnes remembred.

    _Ofel._ My Lord, I haue sought opportunitie, which now           140
    I haue, to redeliuer to your worthy handes, a small remembrance,
    such tokens which I haue receiued of you.

    _Ham._ Are you faire?

    _Ofel._ My Lord.

    _Ham._ Are you honest?                                           145

    _Ofel._ What meanes my Lord?

    _Ham._ That if you be faire and honest,
    Your beauty should admit no discourse to your honesty.

    _Ofel._ My Lord, can beauty haue better priuiledge than
    with honesty?                                                    150

    _Ham._ Yea mary may it; for Beauty may transforme
    Honesty, from what she was into a bawd:
    Then Honesty can transforme Beauty:
    This was sometimes a Paradox,
    But now the time giues it scope.                                 155
    I neuer gaue you nothing.

    _Ofel._ My Lord, you know right well you did,
    And with them such earnest vowes of loue,
    As would haue moou'd the stoniest breast aliue,
    But now too true I finde,                                        160
    Rich giftes waxe poore, when giuers grow vnkinde.

    _Ham._ I neuer loued you.

    _Ofel._ You made me beleeue you did.

    _Ham._ O thou shouldst not a beleeued me!
    Go to a Nunnery goe, why shouldst thou                           165
    Be a breeder of sinners? I am my selfe indifferent honest,
    But I could accuse my selfe of such crimes
    It had beene better my mother had ne're borne me,
    O I am very prowde, ambitious, disdainefull,
    With more sinnes at my becke, then I haue thoughts               170
    To put them in, what should such fellowes as I
    Do, crawling between heauen and earth?
    To a Nunnery goe, we are arrant knaues all,
    Beleeue none of vs, to a Nunnery goe.

    _Ofel._ O heauens secure him!                                    175

    _Ham._ Wher's thy father?

    _Ofel._ At home my lord.

    _Ham._ For Gods sake let the doores be shut on him,
    He may play the foole no where but in his
    Owne house: to a Nunnery goe.                                    180

    _Ofel._ Help him good God.

    _Ham._ If thou dost marry, Ile giue thee
    This plague to thy dowry:
    Be thou as chaste as yce, as pure as snowe,
    Thou shalt not scape calumny, to a Nunnery goe.                  185

    _Ofel._ Alas, what change is this?

    _Ham._ But if thou wilt needes marry, marry a foole,
    For wisemen know well enough,
    What monsters you make of them, to a Nunnery goe.

    _Ofel._ Pray God restore him.                                    190

    _Ham._ Nay, I haue heard of your paintings too,
    God hath giuen you one face,
    And you make your selues another,
    You fig, and you amble, and you nickname Gods creatures,
    Making your wantonnesse, your ignorance,                         195
    A pox, t'is scuruy, Ile no more of it,
    It hath made me madde: Ile no more marriages,
    All that are married but one, shall liue,
    The rest shall keepe as they are, to a Nunnery goe,
    To a Nunnery goe.                   _exit._                      200

    _Ofe._ Great God of heauen, what a quicke change is this?
    The Courtier, Scholler, Souldier, all in him,
    All dasht and splinterd thence, O woe is me,
    To a seene what I haue seene, see what I see.      _exit._


[Sidenote: [SC. VII.]]

    _King_ Loue? No, no, that's not the cause,  _Enter King and Corambis._
    Some deeper thing it is that troubles him.

    _Cor._ Wel, something it is: my Lord, content you a while,
    I will my selfe goe feele him: let me worke,
    Ile try him euery way: see where he comes,                         5
    Send you those Gentlemen, let me alone
    To finde the depth of this, away, be gone.          _exit King._
    Now my good Lord, do you know me?                   _Enter Hamlet._

    _Ham._ Yea very well, y'are a fishmonger.

    _Cor._ Not I my Lord.                                             10

    _Ham._ Then sir, I would you were so honest a man,
    For to be honest, as this age goes,
    Is one man to be pickt out of tenne thousand.

    _Cor._ What doe you reade my Lord?

    _Ham._ Wordes, wordes.                                            15

    _Cor._ What's the matter my Lord?

    _Ham._ Betweene who?

    _Cor._ I meane the matter you reade my Lord.

    _Ham._ Mary most vile heresie:
    For here the Satyricall Satyre writes,
    That olde men haue hollow eyes, weake backes,
    Grey beardes, pittifull weake hammes, gowty legges,
    All which sir, I most potently beleeue not:
    For sir, your selfe shalbe olde as I am,
    If like a Crabbe, you could goe backeward.                        25

    _Cor._ How pregnant his replies are, and full of wit:
    Yet at first he tooke me for a fishmonger:
    All this comes by loue, the vemencie of loue,
    And when I was yong, I was very idle,
    And suffered much extasie in loue, very neere this:               30
    Will you walke out of the aire my Lord?

    _Ham._ Into my graue.

    _Cor._ By the masse that's out of the aire indeed,
    Very shrewd answers,
    My lord I will take my leaue of you.                              35

                 _Enter Gilderstone, and Rossencraft._

    _Ham._ You can take nothing from me sir,
    I will more willingly part with all,
    Olde doating foole.

    _Cor._ You seeke Prince Hamlet, see, there he is.      _exit._

    _Gil._ Health to your Lordship.                                   40

    _Ham._ What, Gilderstone, and _Rossencraft_,
    Welcome kinde Schoole-fellowes to Elsanoure.

    _Gil._ We thanke your Grace, and would be very glad
    You were as when we were at _Wittenberg_.

    _Ham._ I thanke you, but is this visitation free of               45
    Your selues, or were you not sent for?
    Tell me true, come, I know the good King and Queene
    Sent for you, there is a kinde of confession in your eye:
    Come, I know you were sent for.

    _Gil._ What say you?                                              50

    _Ham._ Nay then I see how the winde sits,
    Come, you were sent for.

    _Ross._ My lord, we were, and willingly if we might,
    Know the cause and ground of your discontent.

    _Ham._ Why I want preferment.                                     55

    _Ross._ I thinke not so my lord.

    _Ham._ Yes faith, this great world you see contents me not,
    No nor the spangled heauens, nor earth, nor sea,
    No nor Man that is so glorious a creature,
    Contents not me, no nor woman too, though you laugh.              60

    _Gil._ My lord, we laugh not at that.

    _Ham._ Why did you laugh then,
    When I said, Man did not content mee?

    _Gil._ My Lord, we laughed, when you said, Man did not
    content you.                                                      65
    What entertainement the Players shall haue,
    We boorded them a the way: they are comming to you.

    _Ham._ Players, what Players be they?

    _Ross._ My Lord, the Tragedians of the Citty,
    Those that you tooke delight to see so often.                     70

    _Ham._ How comes it that they trauell? Do they grow restie?

    _Gil._ No my Lord, their reputation holds as it was wont.

    _Ham._ How then?

    _Gil._ Yfaith my Lord, noueltie carries it away,
    For the principall publike audience that                          75
    Came to them, are turned to priuate playes,
    And to the humour of children.

    _Ham._ I doe not greatly wonder of it,
    For those that would make mops and moes
    At my vncle, when my father liued,                                80
    Now giue a hundred, two hundred pounds
    For his picture: but they shall be welcome,
    He that playes the King shall haue tribute of me,
    The ventrous Knight shall vse his foyle and target,
    The louer shall sigh gratis,                                      85
    The clowne shall make them laugh
    That are tickled in the lungs, or the blanke verse shall halt for't,
    And the Lady shall haue leaue to speake her minde freely.

                 _The Trumpets sound, Enter Corambis._

    Do you see yonder great baby?
    He is not yet out of his swadling clowts.                         90

    _Gil._ That may be, for they say an olde man
    Is twice a childe.

    _Ham._ Ile prophecie to you, hee comes to tell mee a the Players,
    You say true, a monday last, t'was so indeede.

    _Cor._ My lord, I haue news to tell you.                          95

    _Ham._ My Lord, I haue newes to tell you:
    When _Rossios_ was an Actor in _Rome_.

    _Cor._ The Actors are come hither, my lord.

    _Ham._ Buz, buz.

    _Cor._ The best Actors in Christendome,                          100
    Either for Comedy, Tragedy, Historie, Pastorall,
    Pastorall, Historicall, Historicall, Comicall,
    Comicall historicall, Pastorall, Tragedy historicall:
    _Seneca_ cannot be too heauy, nor _Plato_ too light:
    For the law hath writ those are the onely men.                   105

    _Ha._ O _Iepha_ Iudge of _Israel_! what a treasure hadst thou?

    _Cor._ Why what a treasure had he my lord?

    _Ham._ Why one faire daughter, and no more,
    The which he loued passing well.

    _Cor._ A, stil harping a my daughter! well my Lord,              110
    If you call me _Iepha_, I hane a daughter that
    I loue passing well.

    _Ham._ Nay that followes not.

    _Cor._ What followes then my Lord?

    _Ham._ Why by lot, or God wot, or as it came to passe,           115
    And so it was, the first verse of the godly Ballet
    Wil tel you all: for look you where my abridgement comes:
    Welcome maisters, welcome all,       _Enter players._
    What my olde friend, thy face is vallanced
    Since I saw thee last, com'st thou to beard me in _Denmarke_?    120
    My yong lady and mistris, burlady but your
    Ladiship is growne by the altitude of a chopine higher than you were:
    Pray God sir your voyce, like a peece of vncurrant
    Golde, be not crack't in the ring: come on maisters,
    Weele euen too't, like French Falconers,                         125
    Flie at any thing we see, come, a taste of your
    Quallitie, a speech, a passionate speech.

    _Players_ What speech my good lord?

    _Ham._ I heard thee speake a speech once,
    But it was neuer acted: or if it were,                           130
    Neuer aboue twice, for as I remember,
    It pleased not the vulgar, it was cauiary
    To the million: but to me
    And others, that receiued it in the like kinde,
    Cried in the toppe of their iudgements, an excellent play,       135
    Set downe with as great modestie as cunning:
    One said there was no sallets in the lines to make the sauory,
    But called it an honest methode, as wholesome as sweete.
    Come, a speech in it I chiefly remember
    Was _Æneas_ tale to _Dido_,                                      140
    And then especially where he talkes of Princes slaughter,
    If it liue in thy memory beginne at this line,
    Let me see.
    The rugged _Pyrrus_, like th'arganian beast:
    No t'is not so, it begins with _Pirrus_:                         145
    O I haue it.
    The rugged _Pirrus_, he whose sable armes,
    Blacke as his purpose did the night resemble,
    When he lay couched in the ominous horse,
    Hath now his blacke and grimme complexion smeered                150
    With Heraldry more dismall, head to foote,
    Now is he totall guise, horridely tricked
    With blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sonnes,
    Back't and imparched in calagulate gore,
    Rifted in earth and fire, olde grandsire _Pryam_ seekes:
    So goe on.

    _Cor._ Afore God, my Lord, well spoke, and with good accent.

    _Play._ Anone he finds him striking too short at Greeks,
    His antike sword rebellious to his Arme,
    Lies where it falles, vnable to resist.                          160
    _Pyrrus_ at _Pryam_ driues, but all in rage,
    Strikes wide, but with the whiffe and winde
    Of his fell sword, th' unnerued father falles.

    _Cor._ Enough my friend, t'is too long.

    _Ham._ It shall to the Barbers with your beard:                  165
    A pox, hee's for a Iigge, or a tale of bawdry,
    Or else he sleepes, come on to _Hecuba_, come.

    _Play._ But who, O who had seene the mobled Queene?

    _Cor._ Mobled Queene is good, faith very good.

    _Play._ All in the alarum and feare of death rose vp,            170
    And o're her weake and all ore-teeming loynes, a blancket
    And a kercher on that head, where late the diademe stoode,
    Who this had seene with tongue inuenom'd speech,
    Would treason haue pronounced,
    For if the gods themselues had seene her then,                   175
    When she saw _Pirrus_ with malitious strokes,
    Mincing her husbandes limbs,
    It would have made milch the burning eyes of heauen,
    And passion in the gods.

    _Cor._ Looke my lord if he hath not changde his colour,          180
    And hath teares in his eyes: no more good heart, no more.

    _Ham._ T'is well, t'is very well, I pray my lord,
    Will you see the Players well bestowed,
    I tell you they are the Chronicles
    And briefe abstracts of the time,                                185
    After your death I can tell you,
    You were better haue a bad Epiteeth,
    Then their ill report while you liue.

    _Cor._ My lord, I will vse them according to their deserts.

    _Ham._ O farre better man, vse euery man after his deserts,      190
    Then who should scape whipping?
    Vse them after your owne honor and dignitie,
    The lesse they deserue, the greater credit's yours.

    _Cor._ Welcome my good fellowes.        _exit._

    _Ham._ Come hither maisters, can you not play the murder         195
    of _Gonsago_?

    _Players_ Yes my Lord.

    _Ham._ And could'st not thou for a neede study me
    Some dozen or sixteene lines,
    Which I would set downe and insert?                              200

    _Players_ Yes very easily my good Lord.

    _Ham._ T'is well, I thanke you: follow that lord:
    And doe you heare sirs? take heede you mocke him not.
    Gentlemen, for your kindnes I thanke you,
    And for a time I would desire you leaue me.                      205

    _Gil._ Our loue and duetie is at your commaund.

                        _Exeunt all but Hamlet._

    _Ham._ Why what a dunghill idiote slaue am I?
    Why these Players here draw water from eyes:
    For Hecuba, why what is Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba?
    What would he do and if he had my losse?                         210
    His father murdred, and a Crowne bereft him,
    He would turne all his teares to droppes of blood,
    Amaze the standers by with his laments,
    Strike more then wonder in the iudiciall eares,
    Confound the ignorant, and make mute the wise,                   215
    Indeede his passion would be generall.
    Yet I like to an asse and Iohn a Dreames,
    Hauing my father murdred by a villaine,
    Stand still, and let it passe, why sure I am a coward:
    Who pluckes me by the beard, or twites my nose,                  220
    Giue's me the lie i'th throate downe to the lungs,
    Sure I should take it, or else I haue no gall,
    Or by this I should a fatted all the region kites
    With this slaues offell, this damned villaine,
    Treacherous, bawdy, murderous villaine:                          225
    Why this is braue, that I the sonne of my deare father,
    Should like a scalion, like a very drabbe
    Thus raile in wordes. About my braine,
    I haue heard that guilty creatures sitting at a play,
    Hath, by the very cunning of the scene, confest a murder         230
    Committed long before.
    This spirit that I haue seene may be the Diuell,
    And out of my weakenesse and my melancholy,
    As he is very potent with such men,
    Doth seeke to damne me, I will haue sounder proofes,             235
    The play's the thing,
    Wherein I'le catch the conscience of the King.        _exit._


[Sidenote: [SC. VIII.]]

                 _Enter the King, Queene, and Lordes._

    _King_ Lordes, can you by no meanes finde
    The cause of our sonne Hamlets lunacie?
    You being so neere in loue, euen from his youth,
    Me thinkes should gaine more than a stranger should.

    _Gil._ My lord, we haue done all the best we could,                5
    To wring from him the cause of all his griefe,
    But still he puts vs off, and by no meanes
    Would make an answere to that we exposde.

    _Ross._ Yet was he something more inclin'd to mirth
    Before we left him, and I take it,                                10
    He hath giuen order for a play to night,
    At which he craues your highnesse company.

    _King_ With all our heart, it likes vs very well:
    Gentlemen, seeke still to increase his mirth,
    Spare for no cost, our coffers shall be open,                     15
    And we vnto your selues will still be thankefull.

    _Both_ In all wee can, be sure you shall commaund.

    _Queene_ Thankes gentlemen, and what the Queene of _Denmarke_
    May pleasure you, be sure you shall not want.

    _Gil._ Weele once againe vnto the noble Prince.                   20

    _King_ Thanks to you both: Gertred you'l see this play.

    _Queene_ My lord I will, and it ioyes me at the soule
    He is inclin'd to any kinde of mirth.

    _Cor._ Madame, I pray be ruled by me:
    And my good Soueraigne, giue me leaue to speake,                  25
    We cannot yet finde out the very ground
    Of his distemperance, therefore
    I holde it meete, if so it please you,
    Else they shall not meete, and thus it is.

    _King_ What i'st _Corambis_?                                      30

    _Cor._ Mary my good lord this, soone when the sports are done,
    Madam, send you in haste to speake with him,
    And I my selfe will stand behind the Arras,
    There question you the cause of all his griefe,
    And then in loue and nature vnto you, hee'le tell you all:        35
    My Lord, how thinke you on't?

    _King_ It likes vs well, Gertred, what say you?

    _Queene_ With all my heart, soone will I send for him.

    _Cor._ My selfe will be that happy messenger,
    Who hopes his griefe will be reueal'd to her.        _exeunt omnes_  40


[Sidenote: [SC. IX.]]

                    _Enter Hamlet and the Players._

    _Ham._ Pronounce me this speech trippingly a the tongue
    as I taught thee,
    Mary and you mouth it, as a many of your players do
    I'de rather heare a towne bull bellow,
    Then such a fellow speake my lines.                                5
    Nor do not saw the aire thus with your hands,
    But giue euery thing his action with temperance.
    O it offends mee to the soule, to heare a rebustious periwig fellow,
    To teare a passion in totters, into very ragges,
    To split the eares of the ignoraut, who for the
    Most parte are capable of nothing but dumbe shewes and noises,
    I would haue such a fellow whipt, for o're doing, tarmagant
    It out, Herodes Herod.

    _players_ My Lorde, wee haue indifferently reformed that
    among vs.                                                         15

    _Ham._ The better, the better, mend it all together:
    There be fellowes that I haue seene play,
    And heard others commend them, and that highly too,
    That hauing neither the gate of Christian, Pagan,
    Nor Turke, haue so strutted and bellowed,                         20
    That you would a thought, some of Natures journeymen
    Had made men, and not made them well,
    They imitated humanitie, so abhominable:
    Take heede, auoyde it.

    _players_ I warrant you my Lord.                                  25

    _Ham._ And doe you heare? let not your Clowne speake
    More then is set downe, there be of them I can tell you
    That will laugh themselues, to set on some
    Quantitie of barren spectators to laugh with them,
    Albeit there is some necessary point in the Play                  30
    Then to be obserued: O t'is vile, and shewes
    A pittifull ambition in the foole that vseth it.
    And then you haue some agen, that keepes one sute
    Of ieasts, as a man is knowne by one sute of
    Apparell, and Gentlemen quotes his ieasts downe                   35
    In their tables, before they come to the play, as thus:
    Cannot you stay till I eate my porrige? and, you owe me
    A quarters wages: and, my coate wants a cullison:
    And, your beere is sowre: and, blabbering with his lips,
    And thus keeping in his cinkapase of ieasts,                      40
    When, God knows, the warme Clowne cannot make a iest
    Vnlesse by chance, as the blinde man catcheth a hare:
    Maisters tell him of it.

    _players_ We will my Lord.

    _Ham._ Well, goe make you ready.      _exeunt players._           45

    _Horatio_. Heere my Lord.

    _Ham._ _Horatio_, thou art euen as iust a man,
    As e're my conuersation cop'd withall.

    _Hor._ O my lord!

    _Ham._ Nay why should I flatter thee?                             50
    Why should the poore be flattered?
    What gaine should I receiue by flattering thee,
    That nothing hath but thy good minde?
    Let flattery sit on those time-pleasing tongs,
    To glose with them that loues to heare their praise,              55
    And not with such as thou _Horatio_.
    There is a play to night, wherein one Sceane they haue
    Comes very neere the murder of my father,
    When thou shalt see that Act afoote,
    Marke thou the King, doe but obserue his lookes,                  60
    For I mine eies will riuet to his face:
    And if he doe not bleach, and change at that,
    It is a damned ghost that we haue seene,
    _Horatio_, haue a care, obserue him well.

    _Hor._ My lord, mine eies shall still be on his face,             65
    And not the smallest alteration
    That shall appeare in him, but I shall note it.

    _Ham._ Harke, they come.

            _Enter King, Queene, Corambis, and other Lords._

    _King_ How now son _Hamlet_, how fare you, shall we haue a play?

    _Ham._ Yfaith the Camelions dish, not capon cramm'd,              70
    feed a the ayre.
    I father: My lord, you playd in the Vniuersitie.

    _Cor._ That I did my L: and I was counted a good actor.

    _Ham._ What did you enact there?

    _Cor._ My lord, I did act _Julius Cæsar_, I was killed            75
    in the Capitoll, _Brutus_ killed me.

    _Ham._ It was a brute parte of him,
    To kill so capitall a calfe.
    Come, be these Players ready?

    _Queene_ Hamlet come sit downe by me.                             80

    _Ham._ No by my faith mother, heere's a mettle more attractive:
    Lady will you giue me leaue, and so forth:
    To lay my head in your lappe?

    _Ofel._ No my lord.

    _Ham._ Vpon your lap, what do you thinke I meant contrary matters?  85

    _Enter in a Dumbe Shew, the King and the Queene, he sits downe
        in an Arbor, she leaues him: Then enters Lucianus with
        poyson in a Viall, and powres it in his eares, and goes
        away: Then the Queene commeth and findes him dead: and goes
        away with the other._

    _Ofel._ What meanes this my Lord?         _Enter the Prologue._

    _Ham._ This is myching Mallico, that meanes my chiefe.

    _Ofel._ What doth this meane my lord?

    _Ham._ You shall heare anone, this fellow will tell you all.

    _Ofel._ Will he tell vs what this shew meanes?                    90

    _Ham._ I, or any shew you'le shew him,
    Be not afeard to shew, hee'le not be afeard to tell:
    O these Players cannot keepe counsell, thei'le tell all.

    _Prol._ For vs, and for our Tragedie,
    Heere stowping to your clemencie,                                 95
    We begge your hearing patiently.

    _Ham._ I'st a prologue, or a poesie for a ring?

    _Ofel._ T'is short my Lord.

    _Ham._ As womens loue.

                    _Enter the Duke and Dutchesse._

    _Duke_ Full fortie yeares are past, their date is gone,          100
    Since happy time ioyn'd both our hearts as one:
    And now the blood that fill'd my youthfull veines,
    Runnes weakely in their pipes, and all the straines
    Of musicke, which whilome pleasde mine eare,
    Is now a burthen that Age cannot beare:                          105
    And therefore sweete Nature must pay his due,
    To heauen must I, and leaue the earth with you.

    _Dutchesse_ O say not so, lest that you kill my heart,
    When death takes you, let life from me depart.

    _Duke_ Content thy selfe, when ended is my date,                 110
    Thou maist (perchance) haue a more noble mate,
    More wise, more youthfull, and one.

    _Dutchesse_ O speake no more, for then I am accurst,
    None weds the second, but she kils the first:
    A second time I kill my Lord that's dead,                        115
    When second husband kisses me in bed.

    _Ham._ O wormewood, wormewood!

    _Duke_ I doe beleeue you sweete, what now you speake,
    But what we doe determine oft we breake,
    For our demises stil are ouerthrowne,                            120
    Our thoughts are ours, their end's none of our owne:
    So thinke you will no second husband wed,
    But die thy thoughts, when thy first Lord is dead.

    _Dutchesse_ Both here and there pursue me lasting strife,
    I once a widdow, euer I be wife.                                 125

    _Ham._ If she should breake now.

    _Duke_ T'is deepely sworne, sweete leaue me here a while,
    My spirites growe dull, and faine I would beguile the tedious
    time with sleepe.

    _Dutchesse_ Sleepe rocke thy braine,                             130
    And neuer come mischance betweene vs twaine.        _exit Lady_

    _Ham._ Madam, how do you like this play?

    _Queene_ The Lady protests too much.

    _Ham._ O but shee'le keepe her word.

    _King_ Haue you heard the argument, is there no offence          135
    in it?

    _Ham._ No offence in the world, poyson iniest, poison in iest.

    _King_ What do you call the name of the play?

    _Ham._ Mouse-trap: mary how trapically: this play is
    The image of a murder done in _guyana_, _Albertus_               140
    Was the Dukes name, his wife _Baptista_,
    Father, it is a knauish peece a worke: but what
    A that, it toucheth not vs, you and I that haue free
    Soules, let the galld iade wince, this is one
    _Lucianus_ nephew to the King.                                   145

    _Ofel._ Ya're as good as a _Chorus_ my lord.

    _Ham._ I could interpret the loue you beare, if I sawe the
    poopies dallying.

    _Ofel._ Y'are very pleasant my lord.

    _Ham._ Who I, your onlie jig-maker, why what shoulde             150
    a man do but be merry? for looke how cheerefully my mother
    lookes, my father died within these two houres.

    _Ofel._ Nay, t'is twice two months, my Lord.

    _Ham._ Two months, nay then let the diuell weare blacke,
    For i'le haue a sute of Sables: Iesus, two months dead,          155
    And not forgotten yet? nay then there's some
    Likelyhood, a gentlemans death may outliue memorie,
    But by my faith hee must build churches then,
    Or els hee must follow the olde Epitithe,
    With hoh, with ho, the hobi-horse is forgot.                     160

    _Ofel._ Your iests are keene my Lord.

    _Ham._ It would cost you a groning to take them off.

    _Ofel._ Still better and worse.

    _Ham._ So you must take your husband, begin. Murdred
    Begin, a poxe, leaue thy damnable faces and begin,               165
    Come, the croking rauen doth bellow for reuenge.

    _Murd._ Thoughts blacke, hands apt, drugs fit, and time agreeing.
    Confederate season, else no creature seeing:
    Thou mixture rancke, of midnight weedes collected,
    With _Hecates_ bane thrise blasted, thrise infected,             170
    Thy naturall magicke, and dire propertie,
    One wholesome life vsurps immediately.      _exit._

    _Ham._ He poysons him for his estate.

    _King_ Lights, I will to bed.

    _Cor._ The king rises, lights hoe.                               175

                       _Exeunt King and Lordes._

    _Ham._ What, frighted with false fires?
    Then let the stricken deere goe weepe,
    The Hart vngalled play,
    For some must laugh, while some must weepe,
    Thus runnes the world away.                                      180

    _Hor._ The king is mooued my lord.

    _Hor._ I _Horatio_, i'le take the Ghosts word
    For more then all the coyne in _Denmarke_.

                  _Enter Rossencraft and Gilderstone._

    _Ross._ Now my lord, how i'st with you?

    _Ham._ And if the king like not the tragedy,                     185
    Why then belike he likes it not perdy.

    _Ross._ We are very glad to see your grace so pleasant,
    My good lord, let vs againe intreate
    To know of you the ground and cause of your distemperature.

    _Gil._ My lord, your mother craues to speake with you.           190

    _Ham._ We shall obey, were she ten times our mother.

    _Ross._ But my good Lord, shall I intreate thus much?

    _Ham._ I pray will you play vpon this pipe?

    _Ross._ Alas my lord I cannot.

    _Ham._ Pray will you.                                            195

    _Gil._ I haue no skill my Lord.

    _Ham._ Why looke, it is a thing of nothing,
    T'is but stopping of these holes,
    And with a little breath from your lips,
    It will giue most delicate musick.                               200

    _Gil._ But this cannot wee do my Lord.

    _Ham._ Pray now, pray hartily, I beseech you.

    _Ross._ My lord wee cannot.

    _Ham._ Why how vnworthy a thing would you make of me?
    You would seeme to know my stops, you would play vpon mee,       205
    You would search the very inward part of my hart,
    And diue into the secreet of my soule.
    Zownds do you thinke I am easier to be pla'yd
    On, then a pipe? call mee what Instrument
    You will, though you can frett mee, yet you can not              210
    Play vpon mee, besides, to be demanded by a spunge.

    _Ros._ How a spunge my Lord?

    _Ham._ I sir, a spunge, that sokes vp the kings
    Countenance, fauours, and rewardes, that makes
    His liberalitie your store house: but such as you,               215
    Do the king, in the end, best seruise;
    For hee doth keep you as an Ape doth nuttes,
    In the corner of his Iaw, first mouthes you,
    Then swallowes you: so when hee hath need
    Of you, t'is but squeesing of you,                               220
    And spunge, you shall be dry againe you shall.

    _Ros._ Wel my Lord wee'le take our leaue.

    _Ham._ Farewell, farewell, God blesse you.

_Exit Rossencraft and Gilderstone._

                           _Enter Corambis._

    _Cor._ My lord, the Queene would speake with you.

    _Ham._ Do you see yonder clowd in the shape of a camell?

    _Cor._ T'is like a camell in deed.

    _Ham._ Now me thinkes it's like a weasel.

    _Cor._ T'is back't like a weasell.

    _Ham._ Or like a whale.

    _Cor._ Very like a whale.      _exit Coram._                     230

    _Ham._ Why then tell my mother i'le come by and by.
    Good night Horatio.

    _Hor._ Good night vnto your Lordship.      _exit Horatio._

    _Ham._ My mother she hath sent to speake with me:
    O God, let ne're the heart of _Nero_ enter                       235
    This soft bosome.
    Let me be cruell, not vnnaturall.
    I will speake daggers, those sharpe wordes being spent,
    To doe her wrong my soule shall ne're consent.      _exit._


[Sidenote: [SC. X.]]

                           _Enter the King._

    _King_ O that this wet that falles vpon my face
    Would wash the crime cleere from my conscience!
    When I looke vp to heauen, I see my trespasse,
    The earth doth still crie out vpon my fact,
    Pay me the murder of a brother and a king,                         5
    And the adulterous fault I haue committed:
    O these are sinnes that are vnpardonable:
    Why say thy sinnes were blacker then is ieat,
    Yet may contrition make them as white as snowe:
    I but still to perseuer in a sinne,                               10
    It is an act gainst the vniuersall power,
    Most wretched man, stoope, bend thee to thy prayer,
    Aske grace of heauen to keepe thee from despaire.

                      _Hee kneeles. enters Hamlet_

    _Ham._ I so, come forth and worke thy last,
    And thus hee dies: and so am I reuenged:                          15
    No, not so: he tooke my father sleeping, his sins brim full,
    And how his soule stoode to the state of heauen
    Who knowes, saue the immortall powres,
    And shall I kill him now,
    When he is purging of his soule?                                  20
    Making his way for heauen, this is a benefit,
    And not reuenge: no, get thee vp agen,
    When hee's at game swaring, taking his carowse, drinking, drunke,
    Or in the incestuous pleasure of his bed,
    Or at some act that hath no relish                                25
    Of saluation in't, then trip him
    That his heeles may kicke at heauen,
    And fall as lowe as hel: my mother stayes,
    This phisicke but prolongs thy weary dayes.       _exit Ham._

    _King_ My wordes fly vp, my sinnes remaine below.                 30
    No _King_ on earth is safe, if Gods his foe.        _exit King._


[Sidenote: [SC. XI.]]

                      _Enter Queene and Corambis._

    _Cor._ Madame, I heare yong Hamlet comming,
    I'le shrowde my selfe behinde the Arras.       _exit Cor._

    _Queene_ Do so my Lord.

    _Ham._ Mother, mother, O are you here?
    How i'st with you mother?                                          5

    _Queene_ How i'st with you?

    _Ham._ I'le tell you, but first weele make all safe.

    _Queene_ Hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended.

    _Ham._ Mother, you haue my father much offended.

    _Queene_ How now boy?                                             10

    _Ham._ How now mother! come here, sit downe, for you
    shall heare me speake.

    _Queene_ What wilt thou doe? thou wilt not murder me:
    Helpe hoe.

    _Cor._ Helpe for the Queene.                                      15

    _Ham._ I a Rat, dead for a Duckat.
    Rash intruding foole, farewell,
    I tooke thee for thy better.

    _Queene_ Hamlet, what hast thou done?

    _Ham._ Not so much harme, good mother,                            20
    As to kill a king, and marry with his brother.

    _Queene_ How! kill a king!

    _Ham._ I a King: nay sit you downe, and ere you part,
    If you be made of penitrable stuffe,
    I'le make your eyes looke downe into your heart,                  25
    And see how horride there and blacke it shews.

    _Queene_ Hamlet, what mean'st thou by these killing words?

    _Ham._ Why this I meane, see here, behold this picture,
    It is the portraiture, of your deceased husband,
    See here a face, to outface _Mars_ himselfe,                      30
    An eye, at which his foes did tremble at,
    A front wherin all vertues are set downe
    For to adorne a king, and guild his crowne,
    Whose heart went hand in hand euen with that vow,
    He made to you in marriage, and he is dead.                       35
    Murdred, damnably murdred, this was your husband,
    Looke you now, here is your husband,
    With a face like _Vulcan_.
    A looke fit for a murder and a rape,
    A dull dead hanging looke, and a hell-bred eie,                   40
    To affright children and amaze the world:
    And this same haue you left to change with this.
    What Diuell thus hath cosoned you at hob-man blinde?
    A! haue you eyes and can you looke on him
    That slew my father, and your deere husband,                      45
    To liue in the incestuous pleasure of his bed?

    _Queene_ O Hamlet, speake no more.

    _Ham._ To leaue him that bare a Monarkes minde,
    For a king of clowts, of very shreads.

    _Queene_ Sweete Hamlet cease.                                     50

    _Ham._ Nay but still to persist and dwell in sinne,
    To sweate vnder the yoke of infamie,
    To make increase of shame, to seale damnation.

    _Queene_ Hamlet, no more.

    _Ham._ Why appetite with you is in the waine,                     55
    Your blood runnes backeward now from whence it came,
    Who'le chide hote blood within a Virgins heart,
    When lust shall dwell within a matrons breast?

    _Queene_ Hamlet, thou cleaues my heart in twaine.

    _Ham._ O throw away the worser part of it, and keepe the          60
    better.

                 _Enter the ghost in his night gowne._

      Saue me, saue me, you gratious
    Powers aboue, and houer ouer mee,
    With your celestiall wings.
    Doe you not come your tardy sonne to chide,                       65
    That I thus long haue let reuenge slippe by?
    O do not glare with lookes so pittifull!
    Lest that my heart of stone yeelde to compassion,
    And euery part that should assist reuenge,
    Forgoe their proper powers, and fall to pitty.                    70

    _Ghost_ Hamlet, I once againe appeare to thee,
    To put thee in remembrance of my death:
    Doe not neglect, nor long time put it off.
    But I perceiue by thy distracted lookes,
    Thy mother's fearefull, and she stands amazde:                    75
    Speake to her Hamlet, for her sex is weake,
    Comfort thy mother, Hamlet, thinke on me.

    _Ham._ How i'st with you Lady?

    _Queene_ Nay, how i'st with you
    That thus you bend your eyes on vacancie,                         80
    And holde discourse with nothing but with ayre?

    _Ham._ Why doe you nothing heare?

    _Queene_ Not I.

    _Ham._ Nor doe you nothing see?

    _Queene_ No neither.

    _Ham._ No, why see the king my father, my father, in the habite
    As he liued, looke you how pale he lookes,
    See how he steales away out of the Portall,
    Looke, there he goes.      _exit ghost._

    _Queene_ Alas, it is the weaknesse of thy braine,                 90
    Which makes thy tongue to blazon thy hearts griefe:
    But as I haue a soule, I sweare by heauen,
    I neuer knew of this most horride murder:
    But Hamlet, this is onely fantasie,
    And for my loue forget these idle fits.                           95

    _Ham._ Idle, no mother, my pulse doth beate like yours,
    It is not madnesse that possesseth Hamlet.
    O mother, if euer you did my deare father loue,
    Forbeare the adulterous bed to night,
    And win your selfe by little as you may,                         100
    In time it may be you wil lothe him quite:
    And mother, but assist mee in reuenge,
    And in his death your infamy shall die.

    _Queene_ _Hamlet_, I vow by that maiesty,
    That knowes our thoughts, and lookes into our hearts,            105
    I will conceale, consent, and doe my best,
    What stratagem soe're thou shalt deuise.

    _Ham._ It is enough, mother good night:
    Come sir, I'le prouide for you a graue,
    Who was in life a foolish prating knaue.                         110

_Exit Hamlet with the dead body._

                      _Enter the King and Lordes._

    _King_ Now Gertred, what sayes our sonne, how doe you
    finde him?

    _Queene_ Alas my lord, as raging as the sea:
    Whenas he came, I first bespake him faire,
    But then he throwes and tosses me about,                         115
    As one forgetting that I was his mother:
    At last I call'd for help: and as I cried, _Corambis_
    Call'd, which Hamlet no sooner heard, but whips me
    Out his rapier, and cries, a Rat, a Rat, and in his rage
    The good olde man he killes.                                     120

    _King_ Why this his madnesse will vndoe our state.
    Lordes goe to him, inquire the body out.

    _Gil._ We will my Lord.      _Exeunt Lordes._

    _King_ Gertred, your sonne shall presently to England,
    His shipping is already furnished,                               125
    And we haue sent by _Rossencraft_ and _Gilderstone_,
    Our letters to our deare brother of England,
    For Hamlets welfare and his happinesse:
    Happly the aire and climate of the Country
    May please him better than his natiue home:                      130
    See where he comes.

                     _Enter Hamlet and the Lordes._

    _Gil._ My lord, we can by no meanes
    Know of him where the body is.

    _King_ Now sonne Hamlet, where is this dead body?

    _Ham._ At supper, not where he is eating, but                    135
    Where he is eaten, a certaine company of politicke wormes
    are euen now at him.
    Father, your fatte King, and your leane Beggar
    Are but variable seruices, two dishes to one messe:
    Looke you, a man may fish with that worme                        140
    That hath eaten of a King,
    And a Beggar eate that fish,
    Which that worme hath caught.

    _King_ What of this?

    _Ham._ Nothing father, but to tell you, how a King               145
    May go a progresse through the guttes of a Beggar.

    _King_ But sonne _Hamlet_, where is this body?

    _Ham._ In heau'n, if you chance to misse him there,
    Father, you had best looke in the other partes below
    For him, and if you cannot finde him there,                      150
    You may chance to nose him as you go vp the lobby.

    _King_ Make haste and finde him out.

    _Ham._ Nay doe you heare? do not make too much haste,
    I'le warrant you hee'le stay till you come.

    _King_ Well sonne _Hamlet_, we in care of you: but specially     155
    in tender preseruation of your health,
    The which we price euen as our proper selfe,
    It is our minde you forthwith goe for _England_,
    The winde sits faire, you shall aboorde to night,
    Lord _Rossencraft_ and _Gilderstone_ shall goe along with you.   160

    _Ham._ O with all my heart: farewel mother.

    _King_ Your louing father, _Hamlet_.

    _Ham._ My mother I say: you married my mother,
    My mother is your wife, man and wife is one flesh,
    And so (my mother) farewel: for England hoe.                     165

                       _Exeunt all but the king._

    _King_ Gertred, leaue me,
    And take your leaue of _Hamlet_,
    To England is he gone, ne're to returne:
    Our Letters are vnto the King of England,
    That on the sight of them, on his allegeance,                    170
    He presently without demaunding why,
    That _Hamlet_ loose his head, for he must die,
    There's more in him than shallow eyes can see:
    He once being dead, why then our state is free.       _exit._


[Sidenote: [SC. XII.]]

              _Enter Fortenbrasse, Drumme and Souldiers._

    _Fort._ Captaine, from vs goe greete
    The king of Denmarke:
    Tell him that _Fortenbrasse_ nephew to old _Norway_,
    Craues a free passe and conduct over his land,
    According to the Articles agreed on:                               5
    You know our Randevous, goe march away.       _exeunt all._


[Sidenote: [SC. XIII.]]

                        _Enter King and Queene._

    _King_ _Hamlet_ is ship't for England, fare him well,
    I hope to heare good newes from thence ere long,
    If every thing fall out to our content,
    As I doe make no doubt but so it shall.

    _Queene_ God grant it may, heav'ns keep my _Hamlet_ safe:          5
    But this mischance of olde _Corambis_ death,
    Hath piersed so the yong _Ofeliaes_ heart,
    That she, poore maide, is quite bereft her wittes.

    _King_ Alas deere heart! And on the other side,
    We vnderstand her brother's come from _France_,                   10
    And he hath halfe the heart of all our Land,
    And hardly hee'le forget his fathers death,
    Vnlesse by some meanes he be pacified.

    _Qu._ O see where the yong _Ofelia_ is!

             _Enter Ofelia playing on a Lute, and her haire
                            downe singing._

    _Ofelia_ How should I your true love know                         15
    From another man?
    By his cockle hatte, and his staffe,
    And his sandall shoone.
    White his shrowde as mountaine snowe,
    Larded with sweete flowers,                                       20
    That bewept to the graue did not goe
    With true louers showers:
    He is dead and gone Lady, he is dead and gone,
    At his head a grasse greene turffe,
    At his heeles a stone.

    _King_ How i'st with you sweete _Ofelia_?

    _Ofelia_ Well God yeeld you,
    It grieues me to see how they laid him in the cold ground,
    I could not chuse but weepe:
    And will he not come againe?                                      30
    And will he not come againe?
    No, no, hee's gone, and we cast away mone,
    And he neuer will come againe.
    His beard as white as snowe:
    All flaxen was his pole,                                          35
    He is dead, he is gone,
    And we cast away moane:
    God a mercy on his soule.
    And of all christen soules I pray God.
    God be with you Ladies, God be with you.      _exit Ofelia._      40

    _King_ A pretty wretch! this is a change indeede:
    O Time, how swiftly runnes our ioyes away?
    Content on earth was neuer certaine bred,
    To day we laugh and liue, to morrow dead.
    How now, what noyse is that?                                      45

                    _A noyse within. Enter Leartes._

    _Lear._ Stay there vntill I come,
    O thou vilde king, giue me my father:
    Speake, say, where's my father?

    _King_ Dead.

    _Lear._ Who hath murdred him? speake, i'le not                    50
    Be juggled with, for he is murdred.

    _Queene_ True, but not by him.

    _Lear._ By whome, by heau'n I'le be resolued.

    _King_ Let him goe _Gertred_, away, I feare him not,
    There's such diuinitie doth wall a king,                          55
    That treason dares not looke on.
    Let him goe _Gertred_, that your father is murdred,
    T'is true, and we most sory for it,
    Being the chiefest piller of our state:
    Therefore will you like a most desperate gamster,                 60
    Swoop-stake-like, draw at friend, and foe, and all?

    _Lear._ To his good friends thus wide I'le ope mine arms,
    And locke them in my hart, but to his foes,
    I will no reconcilement but by bloud.

    _King_ Why now you speake like a most louing sonne:               65
    And that in soule we sorrow for for his death,
    Your selfe ere long shall be a witnesse,
    Meane while be patient, and content your selfe.

                       _Enter Ofelia as before._

    _Lear._ Who's this, _Ofelia_? O my deere sister!
    I'st possible a yong maides life,                                 70
    Should be as mortall as an olde mans sawe?
    O heau'ns themselues! how now _Ofelia_?

    _Ofel._ Wel God a mercy, I a bin gathering of floures:
    Here, here is rew for you,
    You may call it hearb a grace a Sundayes,                         75
    Heere's some for me too: you must weare your rew
    With a difference, there's a dazie.
    Here Loue, there's rosemary for you
    For remembrance: I pray Loue remember,
    And there's pansey for thoughts.                                  80

    _Lear._ A document in madnes, thoughts, remembrance:
    O God, O God!

    _Ofelia_ There is fennell for you, I would a giu'n you
    Some violets, but they all withered, when
    My father died: alas, they say the owle was                       85
    A Bakers daughter, we see what we are,
    But can not tell what we shall be.
    For bonny sweete Robin is all my joy.

    _Lear._ Thoughts & afflictions, torments worse than hell.

    _Ofel._ Nay Loue, I pray you make no words of this now:           90
    I pray now, you shall sing a downe,
    And you a downe a, t'is a the Kings daughter
    And the false steward, and if any body
    Aske you of any thing, say you this.
    To morrow is saint Valentines day,                                95
    All in the morning betime,
    And a maide at your window,
    To be your Valentine:
    The yong man rose, and dan'd his clothes,
    And dupt the chamber doore,                                      100
    Let in the maide, that out a maide
    Neuer departed more.
    Nay I pray marke now,
    By gisse, and by saint Charitie,
    Away, and fie for shame:                                         105
    Yong men will doo't when they come too't:
    By cocke they are too blame.
    Quoth she, before you tumbled me,
    You promised me to wed.
    So would I a done, by yonder Sunne,                              110
    If thou hadst not come to my bed.
    So God be with you all, God bwy Ladies.
    God bwy you Loue.           _exit Ofelia._

    _Lear._ Griefe vpon griefe, my father murdered,
    My sister thus distracted:                                       115
    Cursed be his soule that wrought this wicked act.

    _King_ Content you good Leartes for a time,
    Although I know your griefe is as a floud,
    Brimme full of sorrow, but forbeare a while,
    And thinke already the reuenge is done                           120
    On him that makes you such a haplesse sonne.

    _Lear._ You haue preuail'd my Lord, a while I'le striue,
    To bury griefe within a tombe of wrath,
    Which once vnhearsed, then the world shall heare
    Leartes had a father he held deere.                              125

    _King_ No more of that, ere many dayes be done,
    You shall heare that you do not dreame vpon.       _exeunt om._


[Sidenote: [SC. XIV.]]

                    _Enter Horatio and the Queene._

    _Hor._ Madame, your sonne is safe arriv'de in _Denmarke_,
    This letter I euen now receiv'd of him,
    Whereas he writes how he escap't the danger,
    And subtle treason that the king had plotted,
    Being crossed by the contention of the windes,                     5
    He found the Packet sent to the king of _England_,
    Wherein he saw himselfe betray'd to death,
    As at his next conuersion with your grace,
    He will relate the circumstance at full.

    _Queene_ Then I perceiue there's treason in his lookes            10
    That seem'd to sugar o're his villanie:
    But I will soothe and please him for a time,
    For murderous mindes are alwayes jealous,
    But know not you _Horatio_ where he is?

    _Hor._ Yes Madame, and he hath appoynted me                       15
    To meete him on the east side of the Cittie
    To morrow morning.

    _Queene_ O faile not, good _Horatio_, and withall, commend me
    A mothers care to him, bid him a while
    Be wary of his presence, lest that he                             20
    Faile in that he goes about.

    _Hor._ Madam, neuer make doubt of that:
    I thinke by this the news be come to court:
    He is arriv'de, obserue the king, and you shall
    Quickely finde, _Hamlet_ being here,                              25
    Things fell not to his minde.

    _Queene_ But what became of _Gilderstone_ and _Rossencraft_?

    _Hor._ He being set ashore, they went for _England_,
    And in the Packet there writ down that doome
    To be perform'd on them poynted for him:                          30
    And by great chance he had his fathers Seale,
    So all was done without discouerie.

    _Queene_ Thankes be to heauen for blessing of the prince,
    _Horatio_ once againe I take my leaue,
    With thowsand mothers blessings to my sonne.                      35

    _Horat._ Madam adue.


[Sidenote: [SC. XV.]]

                       _Enter King and Leartes._

    _King._ Hamlet from _England!_ is it possible?
    What chance is this? they are gone, and he come home.

    _Lear._ O he is welcome, by my soule he is:
    At it my iocund heart doth leape for ioy,
    That I shall liue to tell him, thus he dies.                       5

    _King_ Leartes, content your selfe, be rulde by me,
    And you shall haue no let for your reuenge.

    _Lear._ My will, not all the world.

    _King_ Nay but Leartes, marke the plot I haue layde,
    I haue heard him often with a greedy wish,                        10
    Vpon some praise that he hath heard of you
    Touching your weapon, which with all his heart,
    He might be once tasked for to try your cunning.

    _Lea._ And how for this?

    _King_ Mary Leartes thus: I'le lay a wager,                       15
    Shalbe on _Hamlets_ side, and you shall giue the oddes,
    The which will draw him with a more desire,
    To try the maistry, that in twelue venies
    You gaine not three of him: now this being granted,
    When you are hot in midst of all your play,                       20
    Among the foyles shall a keene rapier lie,
    Steeped in a mixture of deadly poyson,
    That if it drawes but the least dramme of blood,
    In any part of him, he cannot liue:
    This being done will free you from suspition,                     25
    And not the deerest friend that _Hamlet_ lov'de
    Will euer haue Leartes in suspect.

    _Lear._ My lord, I like it well:
    But say lord _Hamlet_ should refuse this match.

    _King_ I'le warrant you, wee'le put on you                        30
    Such a report of singularitie,
    Will bring him on, although against his will.
    And lest that all should misse,
    I'le haue a potion that shall ready stand,
    In all his heate when that he calles for drinke,                  35
    Shall be his period and our happinesse.

    _Lear._ T'is excellent, O would the time were come!
    Here comes the Queene.          _enter the Queene._

    _King_ How now Gertred, why looke you heauily?

    _Queene_ O my Lord, the yong _Ofelia_
    Hauing made a garland of sundry sortes of floures,
    Sitting vpon a willow by a brooke,
    The enuious sprig broke, into the brooke she fell,
    And for a while her clothes spread wide abroade,
    Bore the yong Lady vp: and there she sate smiling,                45
    Euen Mermaide-like, twixt heauen and earth,
    Chaunting olde sundry tunes vncapable
    As it were of her distresse, but long it could not be,
    Till that her clothes, being heauy with their drinke,
    Dragg'd the sweete wretch to death.                               50

    _Lear._ So, she is drownde:
    Too much of water hast thou _Ofelia_,
    Therefore I will not drowne thee in my teares,
    Reuenge it is must yeeld this heart releefe,
    For woe begets woe, and griefe hangs on griefe.      _exeunt._    55


[Sidenote: [SC. XVI.]]

                      _Enter Clowne and an other._

    _Clowne_ I say no, she ought not to be buried
    In christian buriall.

    _2._ Why sir?

    _Clowne_ Mary because shee's drownd.

    _2._ But she did not drowne her selfe.                             5

    _Clowne_ No, that's certaine, the water drown'd her.

    _2._ Yea but it was against her will.

    _Clowne_ No, I deny that, for looke you sir, I stand here,
    If the water come to me, I drowne not my selfe:
    But if I goe to the water, and am there drown'd,                  10
    _Ergo_ I am guiltie of my owne death:
    Y'are gone, goe y'are gone sir.

    _2._ I but see, she hath christian buriall,
    Because she is a great woman.

    _Clowne_ Mary more's the pitty, that great folke                  15
    Should haue more authoritie to hang or drowne
    Themselues, more than other people:
    Goe fetch me a stope of drinke, but before thou
    Goest, tell me one thing, who buildes strongest,
    Of a Mason, a Shipwright, or a Carpenter?                         20

    _2._ Why a Mason, for he buildes all of stone,
    And will indure long.

    _Clowne_ That's prety, too't agen, too't agen.

    _2._ Why then a Carpenter, for he buildes the gallowes,
    And that brings many a one to his long home.                      25

    _Clowne_ Prety agen, the gallowes doth well, mary howe
    dooes it well? the gallowes dooes well to them that doe ill,
    goe get thee gone:
    And if any one aske thee hereafter, say,
    A Graue-maker, for the houses he buildes                          30
    Last till Doomes-day. Fetch me a stope of beere, goe.

                      _Enter Hamlet and Horatio._

    _Clowne_ A picke-axe and a spade,
    A spade for and a winding sheete,
    Most fit it is, for t'will be made,      _he throwes vp a shouel_.
    For such a ghest most meete.                                      35

    _Ham._ Hath this fellow any feeling of himselfe,
    That is thus merry in making of a graue?
    See how the slaue joles their heads against the earth.

    _Hor._ My lord, Custome hath made it in him seeme nothing.

    _Clowne_ A pick-axe and a spade, a spade,                         40
    For and a winding sheete,
    Most fit it is for to be made,
    For such a ghest most meet.

    _Ham._ Looke you, there's another _Horatio_.
    Why mai't not be the scull of some Lawyer?                        45
    Me thinkes he should indite that fellow
    Of an action of Batterie, for knocking
    Him about the pate with's shouel: now where is your
    Quirkes and quillets now, your vouchers and
    Double vouchers, your leases and free-holde,                      50
    And tenements? why that same boxe there will scarse
    Holde the conueiance of his land, and must
    The honor lie there? O pittifull transformance!
    I prethee tell me _Horatio_,
    Is parchment made of sheep-skinnes?                               55

    _Hor._ I my Lorde, and of calues-skinnes too.

    _Ham._ Ifaith they prooue themselues sheepe and calues
    That deale with them, or put their trust in them.
    There's another, why may not that be such a ones
    Scull, that praised my Lord such a ones horse,                    60
    When he meant to beg him? _Horatio_, I prethee
    Lets question yonder fellow.
    Now my friend, whose graue is this?

    _Clowne_ Mine sir.

    _Ham._ But who must lie in it?                                    65

    _Clowne_ If I should say, I should, I should lie in my throat sir.

    _Ham._ What man must be buried here?

    _Clowne_ No man sir.

    _Ham._ What woman?

    _Clowne._ No woman neither sir, but indeede                       70
    One that was a woman.

    _Ham._ An excellent fellow by the Lord _Horatio_,
    This seauen yeares haue I noted it: the toe of the pesant,
    Comes so neere the heele of the courtier,
    That hee gawles his kibe, I prethee tell mee one thing,           75
    How long will a man lie in the ground before hee rots?

    _Clowne_ Ifaith sir, if hee be not rotten before
    He be laide in, as we haue many pocky corses,
    He will last you, eight yeares, a tanner
    Will last you eight yeares full out, or nine.                     80

    _Ham._ And why a tanner?

    _Clowne_ Why his hide is so tanned with his trade,
    That it will holde out water, that's a parlous
    Deuourer of your dead body, a great soaker.
    Looke you, heres a scull hath bin here this dozen yeare,          85
    Let me see, I euer since our last king _Hamlet_
    Slew _Fortenbrasse_ in combat, yong _Hamlets_ father,
    Hee that's mad.

    _Ham._ I mary, how came he madde?

    _Clowne_ Ifaith very strangely, by loosing of his wittes.         90

    _Ham._ Vpon what ground?

    _Clowne_ A this ground, in _Denmarke_.

    _Ham._ Where is he now?

    _Clowne_ Why now they sent him to _England_.

    _Ham._ To _England_! wherefore?                                   95

    _Clowne_ Why they say he shall haue his wittes there,
    Or if he haue not, t'is no great matter there,
    It will not be seene there.

    _Ham._ Why not there?

    _Clowne_ Why there they say the men are as mad as he.            100

    _Ham_. Whose scull was this?

    _Clowne_ This, a plague on him, a madde rogues it was,
    He powred once a whole flagon of Rhenish of my head,
    Why do not you know him? this was one _Yorickes_ scull.

    _Ham._ Was this? I prethee let me see it, alas poore _Yoricke_   105
    I knew him _Horatio_,
    A fellow of infinite mirth, he hath caried mee twenty times
    vpon his backe, here hung those lippes that I haue Kissed a
    hundred times, and to see, now they abhorre me: Wheres
    your iests now _Yoricke_? your flashes of meriment: now go       110
    to my Ladies chamber, and bid her paint her selfe an inch
    thicke, to this she must come _Yoricke_. _Horatio_, I prethee
    tell me one thing, doost thou thinke that _Alexander_ looked
    thus?

    _Hor._ Euen so my Lord.                                          115

    _Ham._ And smelt thus?

    _Hor._ I my lord, no otherwise.

    _Ham._ No, why might not imagination worke, as thus of
    _Alexander_, _Alexander_ died, _Alexander_ was buried, _Alexander_
    became earth, of earth we make clay, and _Alexander_ being       120
    but clay, why might not time bring to passe, that he might
    stoppe the boung hole of a beere barrell?
    Imperious _Cæsar_ dead and turnd to clay,
    Might stoppe a hole, to keepe the winde away.

           _Enter King and Queene, Leartes, and other lordes,
                    with a Priest after the coffin._

    _Ham._ What funerall's this that all the Court laments?          125
    It shews to be some noble parentage:
    Stand by a while.

    _Lear._ What ceremony else? say, what ceremony else?

    _Priest_ My Lord, we haue done all that lies in vs,
    And more than well the church can tolerate,                      130
    She hath had a Dirge sung for her maiden soule:
    And but for fauour of the king, and you,
    She had beene buried in the open fieldes,
    Where now she is allowed christian buriall.

    _Lear._ So, I tell thee churlish Priest, a ministring Angell     135
    shall my sister be, when thou liest howling.

    _Ham._ The faire _Ofelia_ dead!

    _Queene_ Sweetes to the sweete, farewell:
    I had thought to adorne thy bridale bed, faire maide,
    And not to follow thee vnto thy graue.                           140

    _Lear._ Forbeare the earth a while: sister farewell:

                   _Leartes leapes into the graue._

    Now powre your earth on, _Olympus_ hie,
    And make a hill to o're top olde _Pellon_:        _Hamlet leapes in_
    Whats he that coniures so?                           _after Leartes_

    _Ham._ Beholde tis I, _Hamlet_ the Dane.                         145

    _Lear._ The diuell take thy soule.

    _Ham._ O thou praiest not well,
    I prethee take thy hand from off my throate,
    For there is something in me dangerous,
    Which let thy wisedome feare, holde off thy hand:                150
    I lou'de _Ofelia_ as deere as twenty brothers could:
    Shew me what thou wilt doe for her:
    Wilt fight, wilt fast, wilt pray,
    Wilt drinke vp vessels, eate a crocadile? Ile doot:
    Com'st thou here to whine?                                       155
    And where thou talk'st of burying thee a liue,
    Here let vs stand: and let them throw on vs,
    Whole hills of earth, till with the heighth therof,
    Make Oosell as a Wart.

    _King._ Forbeare _Leartes_, now is hee mad, as is the sea,
    Anone as milde and gentle as a Doue:
    Therfore a while giue his wilde humour scope.

    _Ham._ What is the reason sir that you wrong mee thus?
    I neuer gaue you cause: but stand away,
    A Cat will meaw, a Dog will haue a day.                          165

                                              _Exit Hamlet and Horatio._


[Sidenote: [SC. XVII.]]

    _Queene._ Alas, it is his madnes makes him thus,
    And not his heart, _Leartes_.

    _King._ My lord, t'is so: but wee'le no longer trifle,
    This very day shall _Hamlet_ drinke his last,
    For presently we meane to send to him,                             5
    Therfore _Leartes_ be in readynes.

    _Lear._ My lord, till then my soule will not bee quiet.

    _King._ Come _Gertred_, wee'l haue _Leartes_, and our sonne,
    Made friends and Louers, as befittes them both,
    Euen as they tender vs, and loue their countrie.                  10

    _Queene_ God grant they may.            _exeunt omnes._


[Sidenote: [SC. XVIII.]]

                       _Enter Hamlet and Horatio_

    _Ham._ Beleeue mee, it greeues mee much _Horatio_,
    That to _Leartes_ I forgot my selfe:
    For by my selfe me thinkes I feele his griefe,
    Though there's a difference in each others wrong.
        _Enter a Bragart Gentleman._
    _Horatio_, but marke yon water-flie,                               5
    The Court knowes him, but hee knowes not the Court.

    _Gent._ Now God saue thee, sweete prince _Hamlet_.

    _Ham._ And you sir: foh, how the muske-cod smels!

    _Gen._ I come with an embassage from his maiesty to you

    _Ham._ I shall sir giue you attention:                            10
    By my troth me thinkes t'is very colde.

    _Gent._ It is indeede very rawish colde.

    _Ham._ T'is hot me thinkes.

    _Gent._ Very swoltery hote:
    The King, sweete Prince, hath layd a wager on your side,          15
    Six Barbary horse, against six french rapiers,
    With all their acoutrements too, a the carriages:
    In good faith they are very curiously wrought.

    _Ham._ The cariages sir, I do not know what you meane.

    _Gent._ The girdles, and hangers sir, and such like.              20

    _Ham._ The worde had beene more cosin german to the
    phrase, if he could haue carried the canon by his side,
    And howe's the wager? I vnderstand you now.

    _Gent._ Mary sir, that yong _Leartes_ in twelue venies
    At Rapier and Dagger do not get three oddes of you,               25
    And on your side the King hath laide,
    And desires you to be in readinesse.

    _Ham._ Very well, if the King dare venture his wager,
    I dare venture my skull: when must this be?

    _Gent._ My Lord, presently, the king, and her maiesty,            30
    With the rest of the best iudgement in the Court,
    Are comming downe into the outward pallace.

    _Ham._ Goe tell his maiestie, I wil attend him.

    _Gent._ I shall deliuer your most sweet answer.          _exit._

    _Ham._ You may sir, none better, for y'are spiced,                35
    Else he had a bad nose could not smell a foole.

    _Hor._ He will disclose himselfe without inquirie.

    _Ham._ Beleeue me _Horatio_, my hart is on the sodaine
    Very sore, all here about.

    _Hor._ My lord, forbeare the challenge then.                      40

    _Ham._ No _Horatio_, not I, if danger be now,
    Why then it is not to come, theres a predestiuate prouidence
    in the fall of a sparrow: heere comes the King.

                 _Enter King, Queene, Leartes, Lordes._

    _King_ Now sonne _Hamlet_, we hane laid vpon your head,
    And make no question but to haue the best.                        45

    _Ham._ Your maiestie hath laide a the weaker side.

    _King._ We doubt it not, deliuer them the foiles.

    _Ham._ First Leartes, heere's my hand and loue,
    Protesting that I neuer wrongd _Leartes_.
    If _Hamlet_ in his madnesse did amisse,                           50
    That was not _Hamlet_, but his madnes did it,
    And all the wrong I e're did to _Leartes_,
    I here proclaime was madnes, therefore lets be at peace,
    And thinke I haue shot mine arrow o're the house,
    And hurt my brother.                                              55

    _Lear._ Sir I am satisfied in nature,
    But in termes of honor I'le stand aloofe,
    And will no reconcilement,
    Till by some elder maisters of our time
    I may be satisfied.                                               60

    _King_ Giue them the foyles.

    _Ham._ I'le be your foyle Leartes, these foyles,
    Haue all a laught, come on sir:             _a hit._

    _Lear._ No none.                  _Heere they play:_

    _Ham._ Iudgement.                                                 65

    _Gent._ A hit, a most palpable hit.

    _Lear._ Well, come againe.                  _They play againe._

    _Ham._ Another. Iudgement.

    _Lear._ I, I grant, a tuch, a tuch.

    _King_ Here _Hamlet_, the king doth drinke a health to thee       70

    _Queene_ Here _Hamlet_, take my napkin, wipe thy face.

    _King_ Giue him the wine.

    _Ham._ Set it by, I'le haue another bowt first,
    I'le drinke anone.

    _Queene_ Here _Hamlet_, thy mother drinkes to thee.               75

                            _Shee drinkes._

    _King_ Do not drinke _Gertred_: O t'is the poysned cup!

    _Ham._ _Leartes_ come, you dally with me,
    I pray you passe with your most cunningst play.

    _Lear._ I! say you so? haue at you,
    He hit you now my Lord:                                           80
    And yet it goes almost against my conscience.

    _Ham._ Come on sir.

        _They catch one anothers Rapiers, and both are wounded,
        Leartes falles downe, the Queene falles downe and dies._

    _King_ Looke to the Queene.

    _Queene_ O the drinke, the drinke, _Hamlet_, the drinke.

    _Ham._ Treason, ho, keepe the gates.                              85

    _Lords_ How ist my Lord _Leartes_?

    _Lear._ Euen as a coxcombe should,
    Foolishly slaine with my owne weapon:
    _Hamlet_, thou hast not in thee halfe an houre of life,
    The fatall Instrument is in thy hand.                             90
    Vnbated and invenomed: thy mother's poysned
    That drinke was made for thee.

    _Ham._ The poysned Instrument within my hand?
    Then venome to thy venome, die damn'd villaine:
    Come drinke, here lies thy vnion here.       _The king dies._     95

    _Lear._ O he is justly serued:
    _Hamlet_, before I die, here take my hand,
    And withall, my loue: I doe forgiue thee.       _Leartes dies._

    _Ham._ And I thee, O I am dead _Horatio_, fare thee well.

    _Hor._ No, I am more an antike Roman,                            100
    Then a Dane, here is some poison left.

    _Ham._ Vpon my loue I charge thee let it goe,
    O fie _Horatio_, and if thou shouldst die,
    What a scandale wouldst thou leaue behinde?
    What tongue should tell the story of our deaths,                 105
    If not from thee? O my heart sinckes _Horatio_,
    Mine eyes haue lost their sight, my tongue his vse:
    Farewel _Horatio_, heauen receiue my soule.       _Ham. dies._

           _Enter Voltemar and the Ambassadors from England.
                  Enter Fortenbrasse with his traine._

    _Fort._ Where is this bloudy sight?

    _Hor._ If aught of woe or wonder you'ld behold,
    Then looke vpon this tragicke spectacle.

    _Fort._ O imperious death! how many Princes
    Hast thou at one draft bloudily shot to death?

    _Ambass._ Our ambassie that we haue brought from _England_,
    Where be these Princes that should heare vs speake?              115
    O most most vnlooked for time! vnhappy country.

    _Hor._ Content your selues, Ile shew to all, the ground,
    The first beginning of this Tragedy:
    Let there a scaffold be rearde vp in the market place,
    And let the State of the world be there:                         120
    Where you shall heare such a sad story tolde,
    That neuer mortall man could more vnfolde.

    _Fort._ I haue some rights of memory to this kingdome,
    Which now to claime my leisure doth inuite mee:
    Let foure of our chiefest Captaines                              125
    Beare _Hamlet_ like a souldier to his graue:
    For he was likely, had he liued,
    To a prou'd most royall.
    Take vp the bodie, such a fight as this
    Becomes the fieldes, but here doth much amisse.                  130

_Finis._

FOOTNOTES:

[2422] Leartes] Leartes, B. Mus. copy.

_newes_] _news_ B. Mus. copy.

[2423] _God_] _God_, B. Mus. copy.

_moneths_] _months_ B. Mus. copy.

_maried,_] _married_ B. Mus. copy.




KING LEAR.




DRAMATIS PERSONÆ[C].


  LEAR, king of Britain.
  KING OF FRANCE.
  DUKE OF BURGUNDY.
  DUKE OF CORNWALL.
  DUKE OF ALBANY.
  EARL OF KENT.
  EARL OF GLOUCESTER.
  EDGAR, son to Gloucester.
  EDMUND, bastard son to Gloucester.
  CURAN, a courtier.
  Old Man, tenant to Gloucester.
  Doctor.
  Fool.
  OSWALD, steward to Goneril.
  A captain employed by Edmund.
  Gentleman attendant on Cordelia.
  Herald.
  Servants to Cornwall.

  GONERIL,   }
  REGAN,     }  daughters to Lear.
  CORDELIA,  }

     Knights of Lear's train, Captains, Messengers, Soldiers, and
                              Attendants.

                           SCENE: _Britain_.

[C] DRAMATIS PERSONÆ. First given by Rowe.

                             THE TRAGEDY OF

                               KING LEAR.




ACT I.


SCENE I. _King Lear's palace._

             _Enter_ KENT, GLOUCESTER, _and_ EDMUND.[2424]

    _Kent._ I thought the king had more affected the Duke[2425][2426]
    of Albany than Cornwall.[2425][2426]

    _Glou._ It did always seem so to us: but now, in the[2425][2426][2427]
    division of the kingdom, it appears not which of the dukes[2425][2426][2428]
    he values most; for equalities are so weighed that
        curiosity[2425][2426][2429]                                    5
    in neither can make choice of either's moiety.[2425][2426]

    _Kent._ Is not this your son, my lord?[2425]

    _Glou._ His breeding, sir, hath been at my charge: I[2425]
    have so often blushed to acknowledge him that now I am[2425]
    brazed to it.[2425][2430]                                         10

    _Kent._ I cannot conceive you.[2425]

    _Glou._ Sir, this young fellow's mother could: whereupon[2425]
    she grew round-wombed, and had indeed, sir, a son for her[2425]
    cradle ere she had a husband for her bed. Do you smell a[2425]
    fault?[2425]                                                      15

    _Kent._ I cannot wish the fault undone, the issue of it[2425]
    being so proper.[2425]

    _Glou._ But I have, sir, a son by order of law, some year[2425][2431]
    elder than this, who yet is no dearer in my account: though[2425][2432]
    this knave came something saucily into the world before he[2425][2433]  20
    was sent for, yet was his mother fair; there was good sport[2425]
    at his making, and the whoreson must be acknowledged.[2425][2434]
    Do you know this noble gentleman, Edmund?[2425][2435]

    _Edm._ No, my lord.[2425][2436]

    _Glou._ My lord of Kent: remember him hereafter as my[2425][2437]  25
    honourable friend.[2425][2437]

    _Edm._ My services to your lordship.[2425]

    _Kent._ I must love you, and sue to know you better.[2425]

    _Edm._ Sir, I shall study deserving.[2425][2438]

    _Glou._ He hath been out nine years, and away he shall[2425]      30
    again. The king is coming.[2425][2439]

      _Sennet. Enter one bearing a coronet,_ KING LEAR, CORNWALL,
       ALBANY, GONERIL, REGAN, CORDELIA, _and_ Attendants.[2440]

    _Lear._ Attend the lords of France and Burgundy, Gloucester.[2441]

    _Glou._ I shall, my liege.    [_Exeunt Gloucester and Edmund._[2442]

    _Lear._ Meantime we shall express our darker purpose.[2443]
    Give me the map there. Know we have divided[2444]                 35
    In three our kingdom: and 'tis our fast intent[2445]
    To shake all cares and business from our age,[2446]
    Conferring them on younger strengths, while we[2447][2448]
    Unburthen'd crawl toward death. Our son of Cornwall,[2448]
    And you, our no less loving son of Albany,[2448][2449]            40
    We have this hour a constant will to publish[2448]
    Our daughters' several dowers, that future strife[2448][2450]
    May be prevented now. The princes, France and Burgundy,[2448][2451]
    Great rivals in our youngest daughter's love,[2452]
    Long in our court have made their amorous sojourn,                45
    And here are to be answer'd. Tell me, my daughters,[2453]
    Since now we will divest us both of rule,[2454]
    Interest of territory, cares of state,[2454][2455]
    Which of you shall we say doth love us most?
    That we our largest bounty may extend                             50
    Where nature doth with merit challenge. Goneril,[2456]
    Our eldest-born, speak first.[2457]

    _Gon._ Sir, I love you more than words can wield the
            matter,[2457][2458]
    Dearer than eye-sight, space and liberty,[2459]
    Beyond what can be valued, rich or rare,                          55
    No less than life, with grace, health, beauty, honour,
    As much as child e'er loved or father found;[2460]
    A love that makes breath poor and speech unable;
    Beyond all manner of so much I love you.[2461]

    _Cor._ [_Aside_] What shall Cordelia do? Love, and be silent.[2462]  60

    _Lear._ Of all these bounds, even from this line to this,
    With shadowy forests and with champains rich'd,[2463][2464][2465]
    With plenteous rivers and wide-skirted meads,[2464]
    We make thee lady. To thine and Albany's issue[2466]
    Be this perpetual. What says our second daughter,[2467]           65
    Our dearest Regan, wife to Cornwall? Speak.[2468]

    _Reg._ I am made of that self metal as my sister,[2469]
    And prize me at her worth. In my true heart[2470]
    I find she names my very deed of love;[2471]
    Only she comes too short: that I profess[2471][2472]              70
    Myself an enemy to all other joys[2471]
    Which the most precious square of sense possesses,[2473]
    And find I am alone felicitate[2474][2475]
    In your dear highness' love.[2474]

    _Cor._               [_Aside_] Then poor Cordelia![2476][2477][2478]
    And yet not so, since I am sure my love's[2479][2480]             75
    More ponderous than my tongue.[2477][2480][2481]

    _Lear._ To thee and thine hereditary ever
    Remain this ample third of our fair kingdom,
    No less in space, validity and pleasure,
    Than that conferr'd on Goneril. Now, our joy,[2482][2483][2484]   80
    Although the last, not least, to whose young love[2483][2485]
    The vines of France and milk of Burgundy[2483]
    Strive to be interess'd, what can you say to draw[2483][2486]
    A third more opulent than your sisters? Speak.[2483][2487]

    _Cor._ Nothing, my lord.                                          85

    _Lear._ Nothing![2488]

    _Cor._ Nothing.[2488]

    _Lear._ Nothing will come of nothing: speak again.[2489]

    _Cor._ Unhappy that I am, I cannot heave[2490][2491]
    My heart into my mouth: I love your majesty[2490]                 90
    According to my bond; nor more nor less.[2490][2492]

    _Lear._ How, how, Cordelia! mend your speech a little,[2493]
    Lest it may mar your fortunes.[2494]

    _Cor._                         Good my lord,
    You have begot me, bred me, loved me: I[2495][2496]
    Return those duties back as are right fit,[2496][2497]            95
    Obey you, love you, and most honour you.
    Why have my sisters husbands, if they say[2498]
    They love you all? Haply, when I shall wed,[2498][2499][2500]
    That lord whose hand must take my plight shall carry[2500]
    Half my love with him, half my care and duty:[2500]              100
    Sure, I shall never marry like my sisters,[2500][2501][2502]
    To love my father all.[2502][2503]

    _Lear._ But goes thy heart with this?

    _Cor._                                Ay, good my lord.[2504]

    _Lear._ So young, and so untender?

    _Cor._ So young, my lord, and true.                              105

    _Lear._ Let it be so; thy truth then be thy dower:[2505]
    For, by the sacred radiance of the sun,
    The mysteries of Hecate, and the night;[2506]
    By all the operation of the orbs[2507]
    From whom we do exist and cease to be;                           110
    Here I disclaim all my paternal care,
    Propinquity and property of blood,
    And as a stranger to my heart and me
    Hold thee from this for ever. The barbarous Scythian,[2508]
    Or he that makes his generation messes[2509]                     115
    To gorge his appetite, shall to my bosom[2509][2510]
    Be as well neighbour'd, pitied and relieved,[2510]
    As thou my sometime daughter.

    _Kent._                       Good my liege,--[2511]

    _Lear._ Peace, Kent![2512]
    Come not between the dragon and his wrath.[2512]                 120
    I loved her most, and thought to set my rest
    On her kind nursery. Hence, and avoid my sight![2513]
    So be my grave my peace, as here I give
    Her father's heart from her! Call France. Who stirs?
    Call Burgundy. Cornwall and Albany,[2514]                        125
    With my two daughters' dowers digest this third:[2515]
    Let pride, which she calls plainness, marry her.
    I do invest you jointly with my power,[2516]
    Pre-eminence and all the large effects[2517]
    That troop with majesty. Ourself, by monthly course,[2518]       130
    With reservation of an hundred knights
    By you to be sustain'd, shall our abode
    Make with you by due turns. Only we still retain[2519]
    The name and all the additions to a king;[2520][2521]
    The sway, revenue, execution of the rest,[2520][2522]            135
    Beloved sons, be yours: which to confirm,
    This coronet part betwixt you.[2523]

    _Kent._                        Royal Lear,
    Whom I have ever honour'd as my king,[2524]
    Loved as my father, as my master follow'd,[2525]
    As my great patron thought on in my prayers,--[2526]             140

    _Lear._ The bow is bent and drawn; make from the shaft.

    _Kent._ Let it fall rather, though the fork invade[2527]
    The region of my heart: be Kent unmannerly,
    When Lear is mad. What wouldst thou do, old man?[2528]
    Think'st thou that duty shall have dread to speak,               145
    When power to flattery bows? To plainness honour's bound,[2529]
    When majesty stoops to folly. Reverse thy doom,[2530]
    And in thy best consideration check[2531]
    This hideous rashness: answer my life my judgement,[2532]
    Thy youngest daughter does not love thee least;                  150
    Nor are those empty-hearted whose low sound[2533]
    Reverbs no hollowness.[2533]

    _Lear._                Kent, on thy life, no more.[2534]

    _Kent._ My life I never held but as a pawn[2535]
    To wage against thy enemies, nor fear to lose it,[2536]
    Thy safety being the motive.[2537]

    _Lear._                      Out of my sight!                    155

    _Kent._ See better, Lear, and let me still remain
    The true blank of thine eye.

    _Lear._ Now, by Apollo,--

    _Kent._                   Now, by Apollo, king,[2538][2539]
    Thou swear'st thy gods in vain.[2538]

    _Lear._                         O, vassal! miscreant!

                                 [_Laying his hand on his sword._[2540]

    _Alb._ } Dear sir, forbear.[2541]                                160
    _Corn._}

    _Kent._ Do;[2542]
    Kill thy physician, and the fee bestow[2543][2544]
    Upon the foul disease. Revoke thy doom;[2543][2545]
    Or, whilst I can vent clamour from my throat,[2543]
    I'll tell thee them dost evil.[2543]

    _Lear._                        Hear me, recreant![2546][2547]    165
    On thy allegiance, hear me![2546][2548]
    Since thou hast sought to make us break our vow,[2549]
    Which we durst never yet, and with strain'd pride[2550]
    To come between our sentence and our power,[2551]
    Which nor our nature nor our place can bear,                     170
    Our potency made good, take thy reward.[2552]
    Five days we do allot thee, for provision[2553]
    To shield thee from diseases of the world,[2554]
    And on the sixth to turn thy hated back[2555]
    Upon our kingdom: if on the tenth day following[2556]            175
    Thy banish'd trunk be found in our dominions,
    The moment is thy death. Away! By Jupiter,[2557]
    This shall not be revoked.

    _Kent._ Fare thee well, king: sith thus thou wilt appear,[2558]
    Freedom lives hence, and banishment is here.[2559]               180
    [_To Cordelia_] The gods to their dear shelter take thee, maid,[2560]
    That justly think'st and hast most rightly said![2561]
    [_To Regan and Goneril_] And your large speeches may
        your deeds approve,[2562]
    That good effects may spring from words of love.
    Thus Kent, O princes, bids you all adieu;                        185
    He'll shape his old course in a country new.          [_Exit._[2563]

    _Flourish. Re-enter_ GLOUCESTER, _with_ FRANCE, BURGUNDY, _and_
                           Attendants.[2564]

    _Glou._ Here's France and Burgundy, my noble lord.[2565]

    _Lear._ My lord of Burgundy,[2566][2567]
    We first address towards you, who with this king[2566][2568]
    Hath rivall'd for our daughter: what, in the least,[2566][2569]  190
    Will you require in present dower with her,[2566]
    Or cease your quest of love?[2566][2570]

    _Bur._                       Most royal majesty,[2571]
    I crave no more than what your highness offer'd,[2571][2572]
    Nor will you tender less.[2571][2573]

    _Lear._                   Right noble Burgundy,[2574]
    When she was dear to us, we did hold her so;[2574][2575]         195
    But now her price is fall'n. Sir, there she stands:[2574][2576]
    If aught within that little seeming substance,[2574][2577]
    Or all of it, with our displeasure pieced,[2574][2578]
    And nothing more, may fitly like your grace,[2579]
    She's there, and she is yours.

    _Bur._                         I know no answer.                 200

    _Lear._ Will you, with those infirmities she owes,[2580]
    Unfriended, new adopted to our hate,
    Dower'd with our curse and stranger'd with our oath,[2581]
    Take her, or leave her?[2582]

    _Bur._                  Pardon me, royal sir;[2583][2584]
    Election makes not up on such conditions.[2584][2585]            205

    _Lear._ Then leave her, sir; for, by the power that made me,
    I tell you all her wealth. [_To France_] For you, great king,[2586]
    I would not from your love make such a stray,
    To match you where I hate; therefore beseech you
    To avert your liking a more worthier way[2587]                   210
    Than on a wretch whom nature is ashamed
    Almost to acknowledge hers.

    _France._                   This is most strange,[2588]
    That she, that even but now was your best object,[2588][2589]
    The argument of your praise, balm of your age,[2588][2590]
    Most best, most dearest, should in this trice of time[2588][2591]  215
    Commit a thing so monstrous, to dismantle[2588]
    So many folds of favour. Sure, her offence[2588][2592]
    Must be of such unnatural degree[2588]
    That monsters it, or your fore-vouch'd affection[2593][2594]
    Fall'n into taint: which to believe of her,[2594][2595]          220
    Must be a faith that reason without miracle[2596]
    Could never plant in me.[2596]

    _Cor._                   I yet beseech your majesty,--[2597][2598]
    If for I want that glib and oily art,[2598][2599]
    To speak and purpose not, since what I well intend,[2600]
    I'll do't before I speak,--that you make known[2601]             225
    It is no vicious blot, murder, or foulness,[2602]
    No unchaste action, or dishonour'd step,[2603]
    That hath deprived me of your grace and favour;[2604]
    But even for want of that for which I am richer,[2605]
    A still-soliciting eye, and such a tongue[2606]                  230
    As I am glad I have not, though not to have it[2607]
    Hath lost me in your liking.

    _Lear._                      Better thou[2608][2609]
    Hadst not been born than not to have pleased me better.[2609][2610]

    _France._  Is it but this, a tardiness in nature[2611]
    Which often leaves the history unspoke[2612][2613]               235
    That it intends to do? My lord of Burgundy,[2613][2614]
    What say you to the lady? Love's not love[2613][2615]
    When it is mingled with regards that stand[2613][2616]
    Aloof from the entire point. Will you have her?[2617]
    She is herself a dowry.[2618]

    _Bur._                  Royal Lear,[2619][2620]                  240
    Give but that portion which yourself proposed,[2620]
    And here I take Cordelia by the hand,[2620]
    Duchess of Burgundy.[2620]

    _Lear._ Nothing: I have sworn; I am firm.[2621]

    _Bur._ I am sorry then you have so lost a father[2622]           245
    That you must lose a husband.

    _Cor._                        Peace be with Burgundy![2623][2624]
    Since that respects of fortune are his love,[2623][2625]
    I shall not be his wife.[2623]

    _France._ Fairest Cordelia, that art most rich being poor,[2626]
    Most choice forsaken, and most loved despised,                   250
    Thee and thy virtues here I seize upon:[2627]
    Be it lawful I take up what's cast away.[2628]
    Gods, gods! 'tis strange that from their cold'st neglect[2629]
    My love should kindle to inflamed respect.
    Thy dowerless daughter, king, thrown to my chance,[2630]         255
    Is queen of us, of ours, and our fair France:
    Not all the dukes of waterish Burgundy[2631]
    Can buy this unprized precious maid of me.[2632]
    Bid them farewell, Cordelia, though unkind:[2633][2634]
    Thou losest here, a better where to find.[2634]                  260

    _Lear_. Thou hast her, France: let her be thine, for we[2635]
    Have no such daughter, nor shall ever see[2635]
    That face of hers again. Therefore be gone[2636]
    Without our grace, our love, our benison.[2637][2638]
    Come, noble Burgundy.[2637]                                      265

                             [_Flourish. Exeunt all but France, Goneril,
                                             Regan, and Cordelia._[2639]

    _France._ Bid farewell to your sisters.[2640]

    _Cor._ The jewels of our father, with wash'd eyes[2641][2642]
    Cordelia leaves you: I know you what you are;[2642][2643]
    And, like a sister, am most loath to call[2642]
    Your faults as they are named. Use well our father:[2642][2644]  270
    To your professed bosoms I commit him:[2645]
    But yet, alas, stood I within his grace,
    I would prefer him to a better place.[2646]
    So farewell to you both.

    _Reg._ Prescribe not us our duties.[2647]

    _Gon._                              Let your study[2648]         275
    Be to content your lord, who hath received you[2648]
    At fortune's alms. You have obedience scanted,[2648][2649]
    And well are worth the want that you have wanted.[2650]

    _Cor._ Time shall unfold what plaited cunning hides:[2651]
    Who cover faults, at last shame them derides.[2652]              280
    Well may you prosper!

    _France._             Come, my fair Cordelia.

                                    [_Exeunt France and Cordelia._[2653]

    _Gon._ Sister, it is not a little I have to say of what
        most[2654][2655][2656]
    nearly appertains to us both. I think our father will hence[2655][2657]
    to-night.[2655]

    _Reg._ That's most certain, and with you; next month[2658]       285
    with us.

    _Gon._ You see how full of changes his age is; the observation[2659]
    we have made of it hath not been little: he always[2660]
    loved our sister most; and with what poor judgement he hath
    now cast her off appears too grossly.[2661]                      290

    _Reg._ 'Tis the infirmity of his age: yet he hath ever but
    slenderly known himself.

    _Gon._ The best and soundest of his time hath been but
    rash; then must we look to receive from his age, not alone[2662]
    the imperfections of long ingrafted condition, but[2663]         295
    therewithal the unruly waywardness that infirm and choleric[2664]
    years bring with them.

    _Reg._ Such unconstant starts are we like to have from[2665]
    him as this of Kent's banishment.

    _Gon._ There is further compliment of leave-taking between[2666]  300
    France and him. Pray you, let's hit together: if our[2667]
    father carry authority with such dispositions as he bears,[2668]
    this last surrender of his will but offend us.

    _Reg._ We shall further think on 't.[2669]

    _Gon._ We must do something, and i' the heat.        [_Exeunt._  305


SCENE II. _The Earl of Gloucester's castle._

                 _Enter_ EDMUND, _with a letter_.[2670]

    _Edm._ Thou, nature, art my goddess; to thy law[2671]
    My services are bound. Wherefore should I[2671]
    Stand in the plague of custom, and permit[2671][2672]
    The curiosity of nations to deprive me,[2671][2673]
    For that I am some twelve or fourteen moonshines[2671]             5
    Lag of a brother? Why bastard? wherefore base?[2671][2674]
    When my dimensions are as well compact,[2671][2675]
    My mind as generous and my shape as true,[2671]
    As honest madam's issue? Why brand they us[2671][2676]
    With base? with baseness? bastardy? base, base?[2671][2677]       10
    Who in the lusty stealth of nature take[2671]
    More composition and fierce quality[2671]
    Than doth, within a dull, stale, tired bed,[2671][2678]
    Go to the creating a whole tribe of fops,[2671][2679]
    Got 'tween asleep and wake? Well then,[2671][2680]                15
    Legitimate Edgar, I must have your land:[2671]
    Our father's love is to the bastard Edmund[2671]
    As to the legitimate: fine word,'legitimate!'[2671][2681]
    Well, my legitimate, if this letter speed[2671]
    And my invention thrive, Edmund the base[2671][2676]              20
    Shall top the legitimate. I grow; I prosper:[2671][2682]
    Now, gods, stand up for bastards![2671]

                       _Enter_ GLOUCESTER.[2671]

    _Glou._ Kent banish'd thus! and France in choler parted![2671][2683][2684]
    And the king gone to-night! subscribed his power![2671][2684][2685]
    Confined to exhibition! All this done[2671][2684][2686]           25
    Upon the gad! Edmund, how now! what news?[2671][2684]

    _Edm._ So please your lordship, none.

                                        [_Putting up the letter._[2687]

    _Glou._ Why so earnestly seek you to put up that letter?[2688]

    _Edm._ I know no news, my lord.

    _Glou._ What paper were you reading?                              30

    _Edm._ Nothing, my lord.

    _Glou._ No? What needed then that terrible dispatch of[2689]
    it into your pocket? the quality of nothing hath not such
    need to hide itself. Let's see: come, if it be nothing, I shall[2690]
    not need spectacles.                                              35

    _Edm._ I beseech you, sir, pardon me: it is a letter from[2691]
    my brother, that I have not all o'er-read; and for so much[2692]
    as I have perused, I find it not fit for your o'er-looking.[2693]

    _Glou._ Give me the letter, sir.

    _Edm._ I shall offend, either to detain or give it. The[2694]     40
    contents, as in part I understand them, are to blame.[2694][2695]

    _Glou._ Let's see, let's see.

    _Edm._ I hope, for my brother's justification, he wrote
    this but as an essay or taste of my virtue.[2696]

    _Glou._ [_Reads_] 'This policy and reverence of age makes[2697]   45
    the world bitter to the best of our times; keeps our fortunes[2698]
    from us till our oldness cannot relish them. I begin to find
    an idle and fond bondage in the oppression of aged tyranny;
    who sways, not as it hath power, but as it is suffered. Come[2699]
    to me, that of this I may speak more. If our father would         50
    sleep till I waked him, you should enjoy half his revenue for
    ever, and live the beloved of your brother,                  EDGAR.'
    Hum! Conspiracy!--'Sleep till I waked him, you should[2700]
    enjoy half his revenue!'--My son Edgar! Had he a hand
    to write this? a heart and brain to breed it in? When[2701]       55
    came this to you? who brought it?[2702]

    _Edm._ It was not brought me, my lord; there's the cunning
    of it; I found it thrown in at the casement of my closet.

    _Glou._ You know the character to be your brother's?

    _Edm._ If the matter were good, my lord, I durst swear            60
    it were his; but, in respect of that, I would fain think it[2703][2704]
    were not.[2703]

    _Glou._ It is his.[2705]

    _Edm._ It is his hand, my lord; but I hope his heart is[2706]
    not in the contents.                                              65

    _Glou._ Hath he never heretofore sounded you in this[2707]
    business?

    _Edm._ Never, my lord: but I have heard him oft maintain[2708]
    it to be fit, that, sons at perfect age, and fathers declining,[2709]
    the father should be as ward to the son, and the[2710]            70
    son manage his revenue.[2711]

    _Glou._ O villain, villain! His very opinion in the letter!
    Abhorred villain! Unnatural, detested, brutish villain!
    worse than brutish! Go, sirrah, seek him; ay, apprehend[2712]
    him: abominable villain! Where is he?                             75

    _Edm._ I do not well know, my lord. If it shall please[2713]
    you to suspend your indignation against my brother till you
    can derive from him better testimony of his intent, you[2714]
    should run a certain course; where, if you violently proceed[2715]
    against him, mistaking his purpose, it would make a great         80
    gap in your own honour and shake in pieces the heart of[2716]
    his obedience. I dare pawn down my life for him that he[2717]
    hath wrote this to feel my affection to your honour and to[2718]
    no further pretence of danger.[2719]

    _Glou._ Think you so?                                             85

    _Edm._ If your honour judge it meet, I will place you
    where you shall hear us confer of this and by an auricular[2720]
    assurance have your satisfaction, and that without any further
    delay than this very evening.

    _Glou._ He cannot be such a monster--[2721]                       90

    _Edm._ Nor is not, sure.[2722]

    _Glou._ To his father, that so tenderly and entirely loves[2722]
    him. Heaven and earth! Edmund, seek him out; wind me[2722][2723]
    into him, I pray you: frame the business after your own[2724]
    wisdom. I would unstate myself, to be in a due resolution.        95

    _Edm._ I will seek him, sir, presently, convey the business[2725]
    as I shall find means, and acquaint you withal.[2726]

    _Glou._ These late eclipses in the sun and moon portend[2727][2728]
    no good to us: though the wisdom of nature can reason it[2729]
    thus and thus, yet nature finds itself scourged by the sequent[2730]  100
    effects: love cools, friendship falls off, brothers divide:
    in cities, mutinies; in countries, discord; in palaces,[2731]
    treason; and the bond cracked 'twixt son and father. This[2732][2733]
    villain of mine comes under the prediction; there's son[2733]
    against father: the king falls from bias of nature; there's[2733]  105
    father against child. We have seen the best of our time:[2733]
    machinations, hollowness, treachery and all ruinous disorders[2733]
    follow us disquietly to our graves. Find out this[2733]
    villain, Edmund; it shall lose thee nothing; do it carefully.[2734]
    And the noble and true-hearted Kent banished! his offence,       110
    honesty! 'Tis strange.                                [_Exit._[2735]

    _Edm._ This is the excellent foppery of the world, that[2736]
    when we are sick in fortune--often the surfeit of our own[2737]
    behaviour--we make guilty of our disasters the sun, the
    moon and the stars: as if we were villains by necessity,[2738]   115
    fools by heavenly compulsion, knaves, thieves and treachers,[2739]
    by spherical predominance, drunkards, liars and adulterers,[2740]
    by an enforced obedience of planetary influence;
    and all that we are evil in, by a divine thrusting on: an admirable
    evasion of whoremaster man, to lay his goatish                   120
    disposition to the charge of a star! My father compounded[2741]
    with my mother under the dragon's tail, and my nativity
    was under Ursa major; so that it follows I am rough and
    lecherous. Tut, I should have been that I am, had the[2742]
    maidenliest star in the firmament twinkled on my[2743]           125
    bastardizing. Edgar--[2744][2745][2746]

                             _Enter_ EDGAR.

    And pat he comes like the catastrophe of the old comedy:[2744][2745]
    my cue is villanous melancholy, with a sigh like Tom o'[2745][2747]
    Bedlam. O, these eclipses do portend these divisions! fa,[2745][2748][2749]
    sol, la, mi.[2749][2750]                                         130

    _Edg._ How now, brother Edmund! what serious contemplation
    are you in?

    _Edm._ I am thinking, brother, of a prediction I read
    this other day, what should follow these eclipses.[2727]

    _Edg._ Do you busy yourself about that?[2751]                    135

    _Edm._ I promise you, the effects he writ of succeed[2752]
    unhappily; as of unnaturalness between the child and the[2753]
    parent; death, dearth, dissolutions of ancient amities;[2753][2754]
    divisions in state, menaces and maledictions against king and[2753]
    nobles; needless diffidences, banishment of friends,[2753]       140
    dissipation of cohorts, nuptial breaches, and I know not what.[2753][2755]

    _Edg._ How long have you been a sectary astronomical?[2753]

    _Edm._ Come, come; when saw you my father last?[2753]

    _Edg._ Why, the night gone by.[2756]

    _Edm._ Spake you with him?                                       145

    _Edg._ Ay, two hours together.[2757]

    _Edm._ Parted you in good terms? Found you no displeasure
    in him by word or countenance?[2758]

    _Edg._ None at all.

    _Edm._ Bethink yourself wherein you may have offended[2759]      150
    him: and at my entreaty forbear his presence till some[2760]
    little time hath qualified the heat of his displeasure, which
    at this instant so rageth in him that with the mischief of[2761]
    your person it would scarcely allay.[2762]

    _Edg._ Some villain hath done me wrong.                          155

    _Edm._ That's my fear. I pray you, have a continent[2763]
    forbearance till the speed of his rage goes slower and, as I[2763]
    say, retire with me to my lodging, from whence I will fitly[2763]
    bring you to hear my lord speak: pray ye, go; there's my[2763][2764]
    key: if you do stir abroad, go armed.[2763]                      160

    _Edg._ Armed, brother![2763]

    _Edm._ Brother, I advise you to the best: go armed: I[2763][2765]
    am no honest man if there be any good meaning towards[2766]
    you: I have told you what I have seen and heard; but[2767]
    faintly, nothing like the image and horror of it: pray you,[2767]  165
    away.

    _Edg._ Shall I hear from you anon?

    _Edm._ I do serve you in this business.         [_Exit Edgar._[2768]
    A credulous father, and a brother noble,
    Whose nature is so far from doing harms                          170
    That he suspects none; on whose foolish honesty
    My practices ride easy. I see the business.
    Let me, if not by birth, have lands by wit:
    All with me's meet that I can fashion fit.            [_Exit._[2769]


SCENE III. _The Duke of Albany's palace._

           _Enter_ GONERIL _and_ OSWALD, _her steward_.[2770]

    _Gon._ Did my father strike my gentleman for chiding
    of his fool?

    _Osw._ Yes, madam.[2771][2772]

    _Gon._ By day and night he wrongs me; every hour[2773][2774]
    He flashes into one gross crime or other,[2774]                    5
    That sets us all at odds: I'll not endure it:
    His knights grow riotous, and himself upbraids us[2775]
    On every trifle. When he returns from hunting,[2776]
    I will not speak with him; say I am sick:
    If you come slack of former services,                             10
    You shall do well; the fault of it I'll answer.

    _Osw._ He's coming, madam; I hear him.        [_Horns within._[2777]

    _Gon._ Put on what weary negligence you please,[2778][2779]
    You and your fellows; I'ld have it come to question:[2778][2780]
    If he distaste it, let him to our sister,[2778][2781]             15
    Whose mind and mine, I know, in that are one,[2778]
    Not to be over-ruled. Idle old man,[2782]
    That still would manage those authorities[2782]
    That he hath given away! Now, by my life,[2782]
    Old fools are babes again, and must be used[2782][2783]           20
    With checks as flatteries, when they are seen abused.[2782][2784]
    Remember what I tell you.

    _Osw._                    Very well, madam.[2785]

    _Gon._ And let his knights have colder looks among you;[2786]
    What grows of it, no matter; advise your fellows so:[2786][2787]
    I would breed from hence occasions, and I shall,[2788]            25
    That I may speak: I'll write straight to my sister,[2788][2789]
    To hold my very course. Prepare for dinner.   [_Exeunt._[2789][2790]


SCENE IV. _A hall in the same._

                    _Enter_ KENT, _disguised_.[2791]

    _Kent._ If but as well I other accents borrow,[2792][2793]
    That can my speech defuse, my good intent[2792][2794]
    May carry through itself to that full issue[2792]
    For which I razed my likeness. Now, banish'd Kent,[2792][2795]
    If thou canst serve where thou dost stand condemn'd,[2792]         5
    So may it come, thy master whom thou lovest[2792][2796]
    Shall find thee full of labours.[2792]

      _Horns within. Enter_ LEAR, Knights, _and_ Attendants.[2797]

    _Lear._ Let me not stay a jot for dinner; go get it ready.
    [_Exit an Attendant._] How now! what art thou?[2798]

    _Kent._ A man, sir.                                               10

    _Lear._ What dost thou profess? What wouldst thou
    with us?

    _Kent._ I do profess to be no less than I seem; to serve
    him truly that will put me in trust; to love him that is honest;
    to converse with him that is wise and says little; to fear[2799]  15
    judgement; to fight when I cannot choose, and to eat no fish.

    _Lear._ What art thou?[2800]

    _Kent._ A very honest-hearted fellow, and as poor as
    the king.

    _Lear._ If thou be as poor for a subject as he is for a[2801]     20
    king, thou art poor enough. What wouldst thou?[2802]

    _Kent._ Service.

    _Lear._ Who wouldst thou serve?[2803]

    _Kent._ You.

    _Lear._ Dost thou know me, fellow?                                25

    _Kent._ No, sir; but you have that in your countenance
    which I would fain call master.

    _Lear._ What's that?[2804]

    _Kent._ Authority.

    _Lear._ What services canst thou do?[2805]                        30

    _Kent._ I can keep honest counsel, ride, run, mar a[2806]
    curious tale in telling it, and deliver a plain message
    bluntly: that which ordinary men are fit for, I am qualified
    in, and the best of me is diligence.

    _Lear._ How old art thou?                                         35

    _Kent._ Not so young, sir, to love a woman for singing,[2807]
    nor so old to dote on her for any thing: I have years on my
    back forty eight.

    _Lear._ Follow me; thou shalt serve me: if I like thee no[2808][2809]
    worse after dinner, I will not part from thee yet. Dinner,[2809][2810]  40
    ho, dinner! Where's my knave? my fool? Go you, and[2810]
    call my fool hither.                     [_Exit an Attendant._[2811]

                         _Enter_ OSWALD.[2812]

    You, you, sirrah, where's my daughter?[2813]

    _Osw._ So please you,--                               [_Exit._[2814]

    _Lear._ What says the fellow there? Call the clotpoll[2815]       45
    back. [_Exit a Knight._] Where's my fool, ho? I think[2816]
    the world's asleep.

                        _Re-enter_ Knight.[2817]

    How now! where's that mongrel?

    _Knight._ He says, my lord, your daughter is not well.[2818]

    _Lear._ Why came not the slave back to me when I                  50
    called him?

    _Knight._ Sir, he answered me in the roundest manner,[2819][2820]
    he would not.

    _Lear._ He would not![2821]

    _Knight._ My lord, I know not what the matter is; but,[2819]      55
    to my judgement, your highness is not entertained with that
    ceremonious affection as you were wont; there's a great
    abatement of kindness appears as well in the general dependants[2822]
    as in the duke himself also and your daughter.

    _Lear._ Ha! sayest thou so?                                       60

    _Knight._ I beseech you, pardon me, my lord, if I be[2819]
    mistaken; for my duty cannot be silent when I think
    your highness wronged.[2823]

    _Lear._ Thou but rememberest me of mine own conception:[2824]
    I have perceived a most faint neglect of late; which I[2825]      65
    have rather blamed as mine own jealous curiosity than as[2826]
    a very pretence and purpose of unkindness: I will look[2827]
    further into't. But where's my fool? I have not seen him[2828]
    this two days.[2829]

    _Knight._ Since my young lady's going into France, sir,[2830]     70
    the fool hath much pined away.

    _Lear._ No more of that; I have noted it well. Go you,[2831]
    and tell my daughter I would speak with her.         [_Exit an[2832]
    Attendant._] Go you, call hither my fool.      [_Exit an Attendant._

                        _Re-enter_ OSWALD.[2833]

    O, you sir, you, come you hither, sir: who am I, sir?[2834]       75

    _Osw._ My lady's father.

    _Lear._ My lady's father! my lord's knave: you whoreson
    dog! you slave! you cur!

    _Osw._ I am none of these, my lord; I beseech your[2835][2836][2837]
    pardon.[2835][2837]                                               80

    _Lear._ Do you bandy looks with me, you rascal?

                                                 [_Striking him._[2838]

    _Osw._ I'll not be struck, my lord.[2839]

    _Kent._ Nor tripped neither, you base foot-ball player.[2840]

                                              [_Tripping up his heels._

    _Lear._ I thank thee, fellow; thou servest me, and I'll[2841]
    love thee.[2841]                                                  85

    _Kent._ Come, sir, arise, away! I'll teach you differences:[2842]
    away, away! If you will measure your lubber's length again,[2843]
    tarry: but away! go to; have you wisdom? so.[2844]

                                                  [_Pushes Oswald out._

    _Lear._ Now, my friendly knave, I thank thee: there's[2845]
    earnest of thy service.              [_Giving Kent money._[2846]  90

                             _Enter_ Fool.

    _Fool._ Let me hire him too: here's my coxcomb.[2847]

                                              [_Offering Kent his cap._

    _Lear._ How now, my pretty knave! how dost thou?

    _Fool._ Sirrah, you were best take my coxcomb.

    _Kent._ Why, fool?[2848]

    _Fool._ Why, for taking one's part that's out of favour:[2849]    95
    nay, an thou canst not smile as the wind sits, thou'lt catch[2850]
    cold shortly: there, take my coxcomb: why, this fellow hath[2851]
    banished two on's daughters, and done the third a blessing[2852]
    against his will; if thou follow him, thou must needs wear
    my coxcomb. How now, nuncle! Would I had two coxcombs            100
    and two daughters![2853]

    _Lear._ Why, my boy?

    _Fool._ If I gave them all my living, I'ld keep my coxcombs[2854]
    myself. There's mine; beg another of thy daughters.

    _Lear._ Take heed, sirrah; the whip.                             105

    _Fool._ Truth's a dog must to kennel; he must be whipped[2855]
    out, when Lady the brach may stand by the fire and[2856]
    stink.

    _Lear._ A pestilent gall to me![2857]

    _Fool._ Sirrah, I'll teach thee a speech.[2858]                  110

    _Lear._ Do.[2859]

    _Fool._ Mark it, nuncle:[2860]
            Have more than thou showest,[2861]
            Speak less than thou knowest,[2861]
            Lend less than thou owest,[2861]                         115
            Ride more than thou goest,[2861]
            Learn more than thou trowest,[2861]
            Set less than thou throwest;[2861]
            Leave thy drink and thy whore,[2861]
            And keep in-a-door,[2861][2862]                          120
            And thou shalt have more[2861]
            Than two tens to a score.[2861]

    _Kent._ This is nothing, fool.[2863]

    _Fool._ Then 'tis like the breath of an unfee'd lawyer,[2864]
    you gave me nothing for't. Can you make no use of[2865]          125
    nothing, nuncle?[2866]

    _Lear._ Why, no, boy; nothing can be made out of
    nothing.

    _Fool._ [To Kent] Prithee, tell him, so much the rent of[2867]
    his land comes to: he will not believe a fool.                   130

    _Lear._ A bitter fool![2868]

    _Fool._ Dost thou know the difference, my boy, between[2868][2869]
    a bitter fool and a sweet fool?[2868][2870]

    _Lear._ No, lad; teach me.[2868]

    _Fool._ That lord that counsell'd thee[2871][2872][2873]         135
              To give away thy land,[2872][2873]
            Come place him here by me;[2872][2873]
              Do thou for him stand:[2872][2873][2874]
            The sweet and bitter fool[2872][2873]
              Will presently appear;[2872][2873]
            The one in motley here,[2872][2873]                      140
              The other found out there.[2872][2873]

    _Lear._ Dost thou call me fool, boy?[2872][2875]

    _Fool._ All thy other titles thou hast given away; that[2872]
    thou wast born with.[2872]                                       145

    _Kent._ This is not altogether fool, my lord.[2872]

    _Fool._ No, faith, lords and great men will not let me; if[2872]
    I had a monopoly out, they would have part on't: and[2872][2876][2877]
    ladies too, they will not let me have all the fool to
        myself;[2872][2877][2878]
    they'll be snatching. Give me an egg, nuncle, and I'll give[2872][2879]  150
    thee two crowns.

    _Lear._ What two crowns shall they be?

    _Fool._ Why, after I have cut the egg in the middle and[2880]
    eat up the meat, the two crowns of the egg. When thou
    clovest thy crown i' the middle and gavest away both parts,[2881]  155
    thou borest thine ass on thy back o'er the dirt: thou hadst[2882]
    little wit in thy bald crown when thou gavest thy golden
    one away. If I speak like myself in this, let him be whipped[2883]
    that first finds it so.[2884]
    [_Singing_] Fools had ne'er less wit in a year;[2885][2886]      160
                  For wise men are grown foppish,
                And know not how their wits to wear,[2887]
                  Their manners are so apish.

    _Lear._ When were you wont to be so full of songs, sirrah?[2888]

    _Fool._ I have used it, nuncle, ever since thou madest thy[2889]  165
    daughters thy mother: for when thou gavest them the rod[2890]
    and puttest down thine own breeches,
    [_Singing_] Then they for sudden joy did weep,[2885][2891][2892]
                  And I for sorrow sung,[2892]
                That such a king should play bo-peep,[2892]          170
                  And go the fools among.[2892][2893]

    Prithee, nuncle, keep a schoolmaster that can teach thy
    fool to lie: I would fain learn to lie.[2894]

    _Lear._ An you lie, sirrah, we'll have you whipped.[2895]

    _Fool._ I marvel what kin thou and thy daughters are:            175
    they'll have me whipped for speaking true, thou'lt have me[2896]
    whipped for lying, and sometimes I am whipped for holding[2897]
    my peace. I had rather be any kind o' thing than a fool:[2898]
    and yet I would not be thee, nuncle; thou hast pared thy
    wit o' both sides and left nothing i' the middle. Here comes[2899]  180
    one o' the parings.[2898][2900]

                            _Enter_ GONERIL.

    _Lear._ How now, daughter! what makes that frontlet on?[2901][2902][2903]
    Methinks you are too much of late i' the frown.[2902][2904]

    _Fool._ Thou wast a pretty fellow when thou hadst no
    need to care for her frowning; now thou art an O without[2905]   185
    a figure: I am better than thou art now; I am a fool, thou
    art nothing. [_To Gon._] Yes, forsooth, I will hold my[2906]
    tongue; so your face bids me, though you say nothing.

            Mum, mum:[2907]
            He that keeps nor crust nor crumb,[2908]                 190
            Weary of all, shall want some.
    [_Pointing to Lear_] That's a shealed peascod.[2909]

    _Gon._ Not only, sir, this your all-licensed fool,[2910][2911]
    But other of your insolent retinue[2910][2912]
    Do hourly carp and quarrel, breaking forth[2910]                 195
    In rank and not to be endured riots. Sir,[2910][2913]
    I had thought, by making this well known unto you,[2910][2914]
    To have found a safe redress; but now grow fearful,[2910]
    By what yourself too late have spoke and done,[2910]
    That you protect this course and put it on[2910][2915]           200
    By your allowance; which if you should, the fault[2910][2916][2917]
    Would not 'scape censure, nor the redresses sleep,[2910][2917][2918]
    Which, in the tender of a wholesome weal,[2910]
    Might in their working do you that offence[2910]
    Which else were shame, that then necessity[2910][2919]           205
    Will call discreet proceeding.[2910][2920]

    _Fool._ For, you know, nuncle,[2921]
            The hedge-sparrow fed the cuckoo so long,[2922]
            That it had it head bit off by it young.[2922][2923]
    So out went the candle, and we were left darkling.               210

    _Lear._ Are you our daughter?

    _Gon._ Come, sir,[2924]
    I would you would make use of that good wisdom[2925][2926]
    Whereof I know you are fraught, and put away[2925][2927]
    These dispositions that of late transform you[2925][2928]        215
    From what you rightly are.[2925]

    _Fool._ May not an ass know when the cart draws the
    horse? Whoop, Jug! I love thee.

    _Lear._ Doth any here know me? This is not Lear:[2929][2930]
    Doth Lear walk thus? speak thus? Where are his eyes?[2931]       220
    Either his notion weakens, his discernings[2932]
    Are lethargied--Ha! waking? 'tis not so.[2933]
    Who is it that can tell me who I am?[2929][2934]

    _Fool._ Lear's shadow.[2935]

    _Lear._ I would learn that; for, by the marks of[2936][2937]     225
    sovereignty knowledge and reason, I should be false[2936][2938]
    persuaded I had daughters.[2936]

    _Fool._ Which they will make an obedient father.[2936][2939][2940]

    _Lear._ Your name, fair gentlewoman?[2939]

    _Gon._ This admiration, sir, is much o' the savour[2941][2942]   230
    Of other your new pranks. I do beseech you[2941]
    To understand my purposes aright:[2941][2943]
    As you are old and reverend, you should be wise.[2941][2944]
    Here do you keep a hundred knights and squires;[2941][2945]
    Men so disorder'd, so debosh'd and bold,[2941][2946]             235
    That this our court, infected with their manners,[2941]
    Shows like a riotous inn: epicurism and lust[2941][2947]
    Make it more like a tavern or a brothel[2941][2948]
    Than a graced palace. The shame itself doth speak[2941][2949]
    For instant remedy: be then desired[2941][2950]                  240
    By her that else will take the thing she begs[2941]
    A little to disquantity your train,[2941][2951]
    And the remainder that shall still depend,[2941][2952]
    To be such men as may besort your age,[2941]
    Which know themselves and you.[2941][2953]

    _Lear._                        Darkness and devils![2941]        245
    Saddle my horses; call my train together.[2941]
    Degenerate bastard! I'll not trouble thee:[2941]
    Yet have I left a daughter.[2941]

    _Gon._ You strike my people, and your disorder'd rabble[2954]
    Make servants of their betters.[2954]                            250

                         _Enter_ ALBANY.[2955]

    _Lear._ Woe, that too late repents,--[_To Alb._] O, sir,
             are you come?[2956]
    Is it your will? Speak, sir. Prepare my horses.[2957]
    Ingratitude, thou marble-hearted fiend,
    More hideous when thou show'st thee in a child
    Than the sea-monster![2958]

    _Alb._                Pray, sir, be patient.[2959][2960]         255

    _Lear._ [_To Gon._] Detested kite! thou liest.[2959][2961][2962]
    My train are men of choice and rarest parts,[2962]
    That all particulars of duty know,
    And in the most exact regard support
    The worships of their name. O most small fault,[2963]            260
    How ugly didst thou in Cordelia show!
    That, like an engine, wrench'd my frame of nature[2964]
    From the fix'd place, drew from my heart all love
    And added to the gall. O Lear, Lear, Lear![2965]
    Beat at this gate, that let thy folly in [_Striking his head._[2966]  265
    And thy dear judgement out! Go, go, my people.[2967]

    _Alb._ My lord, I am guiltless, as I am ignorant[2968]
    Of what hath moved you.[2969]

    _Lear._                 It may be so, my lord.[2970]
    Hear, nature, hear; dear goddess, hear![2970][2971]
    Suspend thy purpose, if thou didst intend[2970]                  270
    To make this creature fruitful:[2970]
    Into her womb convey sterility:
    Dry up in her the organs of increase,
    And from her derogate body never spring[2972]
    A babe to honour her! If she must teem,                          275
    Create her child of spleen, that it may live
    And be a thwart disnatured torment to her.[2973]
    Let it stamp wrinkles in her brow of youth;
    With cadent tears fret channels in her cheeks;[2974]
    Turn all her mother's pains and benefits[2975]                   280
    To laughter and contempt; that she may feel[2976]
    How sharper than a serpent's tooth it is
    To have a thankless child! Away, away!                [_Exit._[2977]

    _Alb._ Now, gods that we adore, whereof comes this?[2978]

    _Gon._ Never afflict yourself to know the cause,[2979]           285
    But let his disposition have that scope
    That dotage gives it.

                         _Re-enter_ LEAR.[2980]

    _Lear._ What, fifty of my followers at a clap!
    Within a fortnight!

    _Alb._              What's the matter, sir?[2981]

    _Lear._ I'll tell thee. [_To Gon._] Life and death! I am
            ashamed[2982]                                            290
    That thou hast power to shake my manhood thus;
    That these hot tears, which break from me perforce,[2983]
    Should make thee worth them. Blasts and fogs upon thee![2984][2985]
    The untented woundings of a father's curse[2985]
    Pierce every sense about thee! Old fond eyes,[2986]              295
    Beweep this cause again, I'll pluck ye out[2987]
    And cast you with the waters that you lose,[2988]
    To temper clay. Yea, is it come to this?[2989]
    Let it be so: yet have I left a daughter,[2990]
    Who, I am sure, is kind and comfortable:[2991]                   300
    When she shall hear this of thee, with her nails
    She'll flay thy wolvish visage. Thou shalt find[2992]
    That I'll resume the shape which thou dost think
    I have cast off for ever: thou shalt, I warrant thee.

                            [_Exeunt Lear, Kent, and Attendants._[2993]

    _Gon._ Do you mark that, my lord?[2994]                          305

    _Alb._ I cannot be so partial, Goneril,
    To the great love I bear you,--[2995][2996]

    _Gon._ Pray you, content. What, Oswald, ho![2995][2997][2998]
    [_To the Fool_] You, sir, more knave than fool, after your
        master.[2995][2997][2999]

    _Fool_. Nuncle Lear, nuncle Lear, tarry; take the fool[3000][3001]  310
    with thee.[3000][3002]

                A fox, when one has caught her,[3002]
                And such a daughter,
                Should sure to the slaughter,
                If my cap would buy a halter:[3003]                  315
                So the fool follows after.                [_Exit._[3004]

    _Gon_. This man hath had good counsel: a hundred knights![3005][3006]
    'Tis politic and safe to let him keep[3005][3007]
    At point a hundred knights: yes, that on every dream,[3008]
    Each buzz, each fancy, each complaint, dislike,                  320
    He may enguard his dotage with their powers
    And hold our lives in mercy. Oswald, I say![3009]

    _Alb._ Well, you may fear too far.

    _Gon._                             Safer than trust too far:[3010]
    Let me still take away the harms I fear,
    Not fear still to be taken: I know his heart.[3011]              325
    What he hath utter'd I have writ my sister:
    If she sustain him and his hundred knights,[3012]
    When I have show'd the unfitness,--

                        _Re-enter_ OSWALD.[3013]

                                             How now, Oswald![3014]
    What, have you writ that letter to my sister?[3014][3015]

    _Osw._ Yes, madam.[3016]                                         330

    _Gon._ Take you some company, and away to horse:[3017]
    Inform her full of my particular fear,[3018]
    And thereto add such reasons of your own
    As may compact it more. Get you gone;[3019]
    And hasten your return. [_Exit Oswald._] No, no, my lord,[3020]  335
    This milky gentleness and course of yours[3021]
    Though I condemn not, yet, under pardon,[3022]
    You are much more attask'd for want of wisdom[3023]
    Than praised for harmful mildness.[3024]

    _Alb._ How far your eyes may pierce I cannot tell:[3025]         340
    Striving to better, oft we mar what's well.[3025][3026]

    _Gon._ Nay, then--[3027]

    _Alb._ Well, well; the event.                       [_Exeunt._[3028]


SCENE V. _Court before the same._

                 _Enter_ LEAR, KENT, _and_ Fool.[3029]

    _Lear._ Go you before to Gloucester with these letters.[3030]
    Acquaint my daughter no further with any thing you know
    than comes from her demand out of the letter. If your diligence
    be not speedy, I shall be there afore you.[3031]

    _Kent._ I will not sleep, my lord, till I have delivered           5
    your letter.                                                [_Exit._

    _Fool._ If a man's brains were in's heels, were't not in[3032]
    danger of kibes?

    _Lear._ Ay, boy.

    _Fool._ Then, I prithee, be merry; thy wit shall ne'er go[3033]   10
    slip-shod.

    _Lear._ Ha, ha, ha!

    _Fool._ Shalt see thy other daughter will use thee kindly;
    for though she's as like this as a crab's like an apple, yet I[3034]
    can tell what I can tell.[3035]                                   15

    _Lear._ Why, what canst thou tell, boy?[3036]

    _Fool._ She will taste as like this as a crab does to a[3037]
    crab. Thou canst tell why one's nose stands i' the middle[3038]
    on's face?[3039]

    _Lear._ No.                                                       20

    _Fool._ Why, to keep one's eyes of either side's nose,[3040]
    that what a man cannot smell out he may spy into.[3041]

    _Lear._ I did her wrong--[3042]

    _Fool._ Canst tell how an oyster makes his shell?[3043]

    _Lear._ No.                                                       25

    _Fool._ Nor I neither; but I can tell why a snail has a
    house.

    _Lear._ Why?

    _Fool._ Why, to put's head in; not to give it away to his[3044]
    daughters, and leave his horns without a case.[3045]              30

    _Lear._ I will forget my nature.--So kind a father!--Be
    my horses ready?

    _Fool._ Thy asses are gone about 'em. The reason why[3046]
    the seven stars are no more than seven is a pretty reason.[3047]

    _Lear._ Because they are not eight?[3048]                         35

    _Fool._ Yes, indeed: thou wouldst make a good fool.[3049]

    _Lear._ To take 't again perforce! Monster ingratitude![3050]

    _Fool._ If thou wert my fool, nuncle, I'ld have thee beaten[3051]
    for being old before thy time.

    _Lear._ How's that?                                               40

    _Fool._ Thou shouldst not have been old till thou hadst[3052]
    been wise.

    _Lear._ O, let me not be mad, not mad, sweet heaven![3053][3054]
    Keep me in temper: I would not be mad![3053]

                        _Enter_ Gentleman.[3055]

    How now! are the horses ready?[3056]                              45

    _Gent._ Ready, my lord.[3057]

    _Lear._ Come, boy.[3058]

    _Fool._ She that's a maid now and laughs at my departure[3059]
    Shall not be a maid long, unless things be cut shorter.[3060]

                                                              [_Exeunt._

FOOTNOTES:

[2424] ACT I. SCENE I.] Actus Primus. Scæna Prima. Ff. See note (I).

King Lear's palace.] A Palace. Rowe. The King's Palace. Theobald. A
State-room in King Lear's Palace. Capell.

Edmund.] F₄. Edmond. F₁ F₂ F₃. Bastard. Qq.

[2425] Kent. _I ... coming._] Spurious, according to Seymour.

[2426] _I thought ... moiety._] Verse, S. Walker conj., ending the
lines _Duke ... always ... division ... dukes ... pois'd ... choice ...
moiety._

[2427] _so_] om. F₂ F₃ F₄.

[2428] _of the ... of the_] _O' th' ... o' th'_ S. Walker conj.

_kingdom_] F₄. _kingdome_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _kingdomes_ Qq.

[2429] _equalities_] Q₁ Q₂. _qualities_ Ff. _equalties_ Q₃.

_weighed_] _pois'd_ So quoted by S. Walker.

[2430] _to it_] Qq. _too't_ F₁ F₂. _to't_ F₃ F₄.

[2431] _sir, a son_] _sir a sonne_ Q₁ Q₂. _a sonne, sir_ F₁ F₂. _a
sonne_ Q₃. _a son, sir_ F₃ F₄.

_year_] _yeares_ Q₃.

[2432] _this, ... account:_] _this, ... account;_ Theobald. _this, ...
account,_ Qq. _this; ... account,_ Ff.

[2433] _something_] _somewhat_ F₃ F₄.

_into_] Q₁ Q₂. _to_ Ff. _in_ Q₃.

[2434] _and the_] _and he_ Q₃.

[2435] _noble gentleman_] Q₁ Q₂ F₁. _nobleman_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _noble
gentlemen_ Q₃.

[2436] Edm.] Ff. Bast. Qq. (and throughout).

[2437] _My ... friend._] Prose in Q₁ Q₂. Two lines, the first ending
_Kent,_ in Ff. See note (II).

[2438] _deserving_] _your deserving_ Pope.

[2439] _again._] _again._ [Trumpets sound, within. Theobald.

[2440] Sennet.] Ff. Sound a Sennet, Q₁ Q₂. Sunday a Cornet, Q₃.

Enter one bearing a coronet, King ... Attendants.] Enter King ...
Attendants. Ff. Enter one bearing a Coronet, then Lear, then the Dukes
of Albany and Cornwall, next Gonorill, Regan, Cordelia, with followers.
Qq.

[2441] SCENE II. Pope.

_the lords_] Ff. _my lords_ Qq.

_Gloucester_] om. Pope.

[2442] _my liege_] Q₁ Q₃. _my leige_ Q₂. _my Lord_ Ff.

[Exeunt....] Capell. Exit. Ff. om. Qq.

[2443] _shall_] F₃ F₄. _shal_ F₁ F₂. _will_ Qq.

_darker_] _dark_ Q₃.

_purpose_] Ff. _purposes_ Qq.

[2444] _Give ... there._] F₁ F₂. _The map there;_ Qq. _Give me the map
here._ F₃ F₄.

_Know_] Qq. _Know, that_ Ff.

[2445] _In_] _Into_ F₄.

_our_] om. Q₃.

_fast_] Ff. _first_ Qq. om. Pope. See note (III).

[2446] _from our age_] Ff. _of our state_ Qq.

[2447] _Conferring_] Ff. _Confirming_ Qq.

_strengths,_] Ff. _yeares_, Qq.

[2448] _while we ... now._] Ff. Omitted in Qq.

[2449] _loving son_] _lov'd_ Seymour conj.

[2450] _daughters'_] Capell. _daughters_ F₁ F₂. _daughter's_ F₃ F₄.

[2451] _now_] om. Hanmer.

_The princes_] Ff. _The two great princes_ Qq. om. Seymour conj.

[2452] _youngest_] Q₁ Q₂ _yongest_ F₁ Q₃. _yonger_ F₂. _younger_ F₃ F₄.

[2453] _Tell me, my_] _Tell my_ F₃ F₄. _Tell me,_ Pope.

[2454] _Since ... state,_] Ff. Omitted in Qq.

[2455] _cares_] _and cares_ Hanmer.

[2456] _Where ... challenge._] Ff. _Where merit doth most challenge
it:_ Qq, ending the line at _it_. Capell, reading with Qq, divides the
lines as Ff.

[2457] _Our ... more_] As one line, S. Walker conj.

[2458] _Sir,_] Put in a line by itself, Johnson. Erased in Collier MS.

_Sir, I love_] _Sir, I Do love_ Steevens, ending line 52 at _I_.

_Sir, I ... matter,_] _I love you sir,_ Pope. _Sir, I do love you Far
more ... matter: love you_ Capell.

_I love_] Ff. _I do love_ Qq.

_words_] Qq. _word_ Ff.

_wield_] Q₁ Q₃ F₄. _weild_ Q₂ F₁ F₂ F₃. _yield_ Capell conj.

[2459] _and_] Ff. _or_ Qq.

[2460] _much as_] Ff. _much a_ Qq.

_e'er_] _e're_ F₃ F₄. _ere_ Q₁ Q₂ F₁ F₂. _eare_ Q₃.

_found_] Ff. _friend_ Qq.

[2461] _manner of so_] _manner. So_ Becket conj.

[2462] [Aside] Pope. om. Qq Ff.

_do?_] Pope. _do,_ Qq. _speake?_ F₁ F₂. _speak?_ F₃ F₄.

[2463] _shadowy_] Ff. _shady_ Qq.

[2464] _and with ... rivers_] Ff. Omitted in Qq.

[2465] _champains_] F₁. _champions_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[2466] _Albany's_] F₄. _Albanies_ Q₁ F₁ F₂. _Albaines_ Q₂. _Albaenids_
Q₃. _Albanie's_ F₃.

_issue_] Qq. _issues_ Ff.

[2467] _What says_] om. Seymour conj.

[2468] _wife to_] Q₁ Q₂. _wife of_ Ff Q₃.

_Cornwall? Speak._] Pope. _Cornwall, speake._ Q₁ Q₃. _Cornwell,
speake?_ Q₂. _Cornwall?_ Ff (omitting _Speak_).

[2469] _I am_] Ff. _Sir I am_ Qq. _I'm_ Pope. _Sir, I'm_ Dyce, ed. 2,
putting _Sir_ in a separate line.

_that self metal_] _that selfe-mettle_ F₁ F₂. _that self-metal_ F₃
F₄. _the selfe-same mettall_ Q₁. _the selfe same mettall_ Q₂. _the
selfe-same mettell_ Q₃.

_as my sister_] Ff. _that my sister is_ Qq.

[2470] _me_] _you_ Mason conj.

_worth. In ... heart_] _worth. In ... heart,_ Ff. _worth in ... heart,_
Qq. _worth, in ... heart._ Theobald (Bishop conj.) _worth, in ...
heart_ Tyrwhitt conj.

[2471] _I find ... joys,_] Three lines in Ff. Two, the first ending
_short_, in Qq.

[2472] _comes too short_] Ff. _came short_ Qq.

_short:_] Theobald. _short,_ Qq Ff.

_that_] _in that_ Keightley.

[2473] _precious square_] _precious spirit_ Hanmer. _spacious sphere_
Singer (ed. 2). _precious sphere_ Collier (Collier MS.) _spacious
square_ Keightley (Grant White conj. withdrawn).

_sense_] _sense'_ Smith apud Grey conj.

_possesses_] Qq. _professes_ Ff.

_precious treasure_ Bailey conj.

[2474] _And ... love._] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

[2475] _alone_] _all one_ Q₃.

[2476] [Aside] Pope. om Qq Ff.

[2477] _Then ... tongue._] As in Ff. Two lines, the first ending
_sure,_ in Qq.

[2478] _Cordelia_] _Cord._ Q₂.

[2479] _love's_] Q₁ Ff Q₃. _loves_ Q₂.

[2480] _love's ... tongue._] _love, ... tongue, outvalues theirs._
Seymour conj.

[2481] _ponderous_] Ff. _richer_ Qq. _plenteous_ Collier MS. _precious_
Grant White conj.

_my tongue_] _their tongue_ Warburton conj.

[2482] _conferr'd_] Ff. _confirm'd_ Qq.

[2483] See note (IV).

[2484] _Now_] Ff. _but now_ Qq.

[2485] _the last, not_] Qq. _our last and_ Ff. _our last, not_ Pope.

_least, ... love_] _least; ... love,_ Ff. _least in our deere love,_
Qq. _least; in whose young love_ Hanmer.

[2486] _interess'd_] Malone. _interest_ Ff. _int'ress'd_ Theobald.

_can you say_] _say you_ Pope.

_draw_] Ff. _win_ Qq.

[2487] _opulent_] _opilent_ F₁.

[2488] Lear. _Nothing!_ Cor. _Nothing._] Omitted in Qq. Lear. _How!_
Cor. _Nothing._ Capell.

[2489] _Nothing will come_] Ff. _How, nothing can come_ Qq.

[2490] _Unhappy ... less_] As in Ff. Prose in Qq.

[2491] _heave_] _have_ Q₃.

[2492] _nor more_] Qq. _no more_ Ff.

[2493] _How, how, Cordelia!_] _Go too, go too,_ Q₁ Q₃. _Goe to, goe
to,_ Q₂.

_mend_] _mend me_ Capell, reading with Qq.

[2494] _it_] Qq. _you_ Ff.

[2495] _begot_] _bgot_ Q₁ (Cap.)

[2496] _I ... fit,_] As in Pope. One line in Qq Ff.

[2497] _are_] _is_ Keightley.

[2498] _Why ... all?_] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

[2499] _Haply_] Q₁ Q₃. _Happely_ Q₂. _Happily_ Ff.

[2500] _Haply ... never_] Arranged as in Ff. Three lines, ending
_hand ... him, ... never,_ in Qq.

[2501] _marry_] _Matry_ Q₁ (Cap.) _Mary_ Q₂.

[2502] _marry ... all._] Arranged as in Pope. One line in Qq.

[2503] _To ... all._] Qq. Omitted in Ff.

[2504] _thy heart with this?_] Ff. _this with thy heart!_ Qq (tis Q₃).

_Ay, good my_] _I good my_ Q₁ Q₂. _I goe my_ Q₃. _I my good_ Ff.

[2505] _Let_] Ff. _Well let_ Qq.

_thy truth_] _the truth_ F₃ F₄.

[2506] _mysteries_] F₂ F₃ F₄. _mistresse_ Qq. _miseries_ F₁.

_Hecate_] F₃ F₄. _Heccat_ Qq F₁. _Hecat_ F₂.

_night_] Ff. _might_ Qq.

[2507] _operation_] Qq F₁. _operations_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[2508] _this_] _this tyme_ Anon. conj. MS. See note (V).

_ever. The_] Ff. _ever, the_ Qq.

_barbarous_] _barbarious_ Q₃.

[2509] _Or ... appetite,_] Arranged as in Ff. Two lines, the first
ending _generation,_ in Qq.

[2510] _shall to my bosom Be_] Ff. _Shall be_ Q₁ Q₃. _Shall bee_ Q₂.

[2511] _liege,--_] _liege--_ Rowe. _liege._ Qq Ff.

[2512] _Peace ... wrath._] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

_Peace, Kent!... between_] _Peace,--come not 'tween_ Seymour conj.

[2513] _and_] om. Pope.

[To Cor. Rowe. To Kent. Heath conj.

[2514] _Burgundy._] _Burgundy--_ Rowe. _Burgundy,_ Qq Ff.

[Exit an Att. Capell. Exit Edmund. Capell conj. MS.

[2515] _daughters' dowers_] Warburton. _daughters dowres_ F₁ F₃ F₄.
_daughters dower_ Qq. _daughters, dowres_ F₂.

_this_] Qq. _the_ Ff.

[2516] _with_] Ff. _in_ Qq.

[2517] _Pre-eminence_] Malone. _Preheminence_ Qq Ff.

[2518] _Ourself_] _We_ Seymour conj.

[2519] _turns_] _turnes_ Qq. _turne_ F₁ F₂. _turn_ F₃ F₄.

_we still_] Qq. _we shall_ Ff. om. Pope. _we_ Capell.

[2520] _The name ... rest,_] As in Qq. The first line ends _sway,_ in
Ff. Three lines, ending _king; ... sway, ... rest,_ in Steevens (1793).

[2521] _name, and ... king;_] _name; but ... king,_ Theobald conj.
(withdrawn).

_and all_] om. Capell, reading _The name ... sway,_ as one line.

_additions_] Qq. _addition_ Ff.

[2522] _of the rest_] om. Pope. _office_ Theobald conj. (withdrawn).
_of th' hest_ Warburton. _and the rest_ Capell. _interest_ Heath conj.
_all the rest_ Jennens conj. [offers it. (a stage direction) Anon. conj.

[2523] _betwixt_] Qq. _betweene_ F₁ F₂. _between_ F₃ F₄.

[Giving the crown. Pope.

[in Action of preventing him. Capell.

[2524] _my king_] _a king_ F₄.

[2525] _follow'd_] Ff. _followed_ Qq.

[2526] _As my great_] Qq F₁ _As my_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _And as my_ Rowe.

_prayers,--_] _prayers--_ Rowe. _praiers._ Q₁ Q₃ F₁ F₂. _prayers._ Q₂
F₃ F₄.

[2527] _Let it ... hollowness_] As in Ff (except line 146). The
lines end _rather, ... heart, ... mad ... duty ... bowes, folly, ...
consideration ... life, ... least, ... sound ... hollownesse_ in Qq.

[2528] _mad_] _man_ Q₂.

_wouldst_] F₄. _wouldest_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _wilt_ Qq.

[2529] _When ... bound,_] One line in Johnson. Two in Ff.

_honour's_] Ff. _honours_ Qq. _honour Is_ Pope.

[2530] _stoops to folly_] Qq. _falls to folly_ Ff. _to folly falls_
Pope, ending the lines _honour ... falls_.

_folly._] Johnson, _folly;_ Rowe. _folly,_ Qq Ff.

_Reverse thy doom_] Qq. _reserve thy state_ Ff.

[2531] _And ... consideration_] _with better judgment_ Pope, reading
_Reserve ... check_ as one line.

[2532] _answer ... judgement_] _with my life I answer_ Pope.

[2533] _sound Reverbs_] Qq. _sounds Reverbe_ Ff.

[2534] _Kent,_] om. Seymour conj.

_thy life_] _my life_ F₃ F₄.

[2535] _as a_] _as_ F₁

[2536] _thy_] Qq. _thine_ Ff.

_enemies_] _foes_ Pope.

_nor_] Qq. _nere_ F₁ F₂. _ne're_ F₃. _ne'er_ F₄.

[2537] _the motive_] Qq. _motive_ Ff.

[2538] _Now ... vain._] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

[2539] _Apollo,--_] _Apollo--_ Q₁ Q₃. _Appollo,_ Q₂. _Apollo,_ F₁
_Apollo._ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[2540] _swear'st_] _swearest_ Q₂ Q₃.

_O, vassal! miscreant!_] _O vassal! miscreant._ Ff. _Vassall,
recreant._ Qq. _O, vassal! recreant!_ Collier.

[Laying....] Rowe. om. Qq Ff. In Action of drawing his Sword. Capell.

[2541] Alb. Corn. _Dear sir, forbear._] Ff. Omitted in Qq.

[2542] _Do_] Qq. om. Ff. Put in a separate line first by Steevens
(1793).

[2543] _Kill ... evil._] Divided as in Ff. The lines end
_physition, ... disease, ... clamour ... evill_ in Qq.

[2544] _the fee_] Qq. _thy fee_ Ff.

[2545] _Upon the_] _Upon thy_ Capell.

_thy doom_] _thy doome_ Qq. _thy gift_ Ff (_guift_ F₁). _the gift_ Rowe
(ed. 2).

[2546] _Hear ... me!_] Arranged as by Capell. One line in Qq Ff.

[2547] _recreant_] Ff. om. Qq.

[2548] _On thy ... me!_] Omitted by Pope.

_thy_] Qq. _thine_ Ff.

[2549] _Since_] Qq. _That_ Ff.

_vow_] Qq. _vowes_ Ff.

[2550] _strain'd_] Ff. _straied_ Qq.

[2551] _between_] Q₃. _betweene_ Q₁ Q₂. _betwixt_ Ff.

_sentence_] _sentences_ F₁.

[2552] _Our ... made_] _Nor ... make_ Heath conj. _Or ... make_ Johnson
conj. _Make we our potency_ Becket conj.

_made_] Q₂ Ff. _make_ Q₁ Q₃.

[2553] _Five_] Ff. _Foure_ Qq.

[2554] _diseases_] Q₁ Q₂. _disasters_ Ff. _defeases_ Q₃.

[2555] _sixth_] F₄. _sixt_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _fift_ Qq.

[2556] _on_] Q₁ Q₂ F₁. om. F₂ F₃ F₄. _one_ Q₃.

_tenth_] _seventh_ Collier (Collier MS.)

[2557] _The ... Away!_] _That ... Away--begone!_ Seymour conj., ending
the line _begone!_

_death. Away! By_] _death: away. By_ Pope, _death, away, By_ Q₁ Q₃
(ending the line _away_). _death, away, by_ Q₂ (ending the line
_Jupiter_). _death, away. By_ Ff.

[2558] _Fare_] Ff. _Why fare_ Qq.

_sith thus_] Ff. _since thus_ Q₂. _since_ Q₁ Q₃.

[2559] _Freedom_] Ff. _Friendship_ Qq.

[2560] [To Cordelia] Hanmer. om. Qq Ff.

_dear shelter_] Ff. _protection_ Qq.

_thee, maid_] F₄. _thee maid_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _the maid_ Q₁ Q₃. _the maide_
Q₂.

[2561] _justly_] Ff. _rightly_ Qq.

_think'st_] F₁ F₂ F₃. _thinkes_ Q₁. _thinks_ Q₂ Q₃ F₄.

_hast_] Q₂ Ff. _hath_ Q₁ Q₃.

_rightly_] Ff. _justly_ Qq.

[2562] [To Regan....] To Gon. and Regan. Hanmer. om. Qq Ff.

_your large speeches_] _you, large speechers,_ Capell.

[2563] _course_] _corse_ Anon. conj. (Gent. Mag. LX. 402).

[2564] Flourish.] F₁. om. Qq F₂ F₃ F₄.

Re-enter....] Capell. Enter France and Burgundy with Glocester. Qq
(Burgundie Q₂. Gloster Q₂). Enter Gloster with France, and Burgundy,
Attendants. Ff.

[2565] SCENE III. Pope.

Glou.] Glo. Q₁ Q₃. Glost. Q₂. Cor. Ff.

[2566] _My ... love?_] Arranged as in Ff. Four lines, ending _you, ...
daughter, ... present ... love?_ in Qq.

[2567] _My_] _They are welcome both: my_ Seymour conj.

_lord_] _L._ Q₂.

[2568] _towards_] Qq. _toward_ Ff.

_this_] Ff. _a_ Qq.

[2569] _Hath_] _Have_ Pope.

_in the least_] _at least_ Pope. _is the least_ Long MS.

[2570] _Most_] Ff. om. Qq.

[2571] _royal ... less._] Divided as in Ff. Two lines, the first ending
_what,_ in Qq.

[2572] _what_] Qq F₃ F₄. _hath_ F₁ F₂.

_offer'd_] Ff. _offered_ Qq.

[2573] _less._] F₄. _lesse?_ Qq F₁ F₂. _less?_ F₃.

[2574] _Right ... pieced,_] Arranged as in Ff. Four lines, ending
_us, ... fallen; ... little ... peec'st,_ in Qq.

[2575] _did hold_] Qq F₁. _held_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[2576] _price_] _prise_ Q₂.

_fall'n_] F₃ F₄. _fallen_ Qq F₁ F₂.

[2577] _little seeming_] _little, seeming,_ Capell. _little, seeming_
Steevens (1778). _little-seeming_ S. Walker conj.

[2578] _with our_] _without_ Q₃.

_pieced_] _peec'st_ Qq. _piec'd_ Ff. _pierc'd_ Pope.

[2579] _more_] Ff. _else_ Qq.

[2580] _Will_] Ff. _Sir, will_ Q₁ Q₃. _Sir will_ Q₂.

[2581] _Dower'd_] _Dow'rd_ F₁. _Dowr'd_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _Couered_ Q₁ Q₂.
_Covered_ Q₃.

[2582] _her?_] Rowe. _her._ Qq Ff.

[2583] _Pardon ... conditions._] Divided as in Ff. The first line ends
at _up_ in Qq.

[2584] _me_] om. Pope.

[2585] _makes not up on_] _mates not upon_ Jackson conj.

_up on_] Qq. _up in_ Ff. _upon_ Mason conj.

[2586] [To France] Pope. om. Qq Ff.

[2587] _worthier_] _worthy_ Pope.

[2588] _This ... degree_] Arranged as in Ff. Six lines, ending _now ...
praise, ... deerest, ... thing ... favour, ... degree,_ in Qq.

[2589] _she, that_] Q₂. _she that_ Q₁ Q₃. _she whom_ F₁. _she who_ F₂
F₃ F₄.

_best_] Qq F₂ F₃ F₄. om. F₁. _blest_ Collier (Collier MS.)

[2590] _The ... praise_] _Your praise's argument_ Pope.

[2591] _Most best, most_] Qq. _The best, the_ Ff.

_Most ... dearest_] _Dearest and best_ Pope.

[2592] _her offence_] _th' offence_ Pope.

[2593] _That monsters it_] _As monstrous is_ Rowe. _As monsters it_
Hanmer. _That masters it_ Becket conj. _That man starts at_ Jackson
conj., reading the rest with Johnson conj.

_or_] _ere_ Theobald conj. (withdrawn). _your_] Ff. _you_ Qq.

_fore-vouchd_] _fore-voucht_ Ff. _for voucht_ Qq.

_affection_] Ff. _affections_ Qq.

[2594] _or ... Falln_] _or your fore-vouchd affection Could not fall_
Rowe. _or you for vouch'd affection Fall_ Johnson conj.

[2595] _Falln_] _Falne_ Q₁ Q₂. _Falen_ Q₃. _Fall_ Ff. _Could not fall_
Rowe. _Falls_ Johnson conj. See note (VI).

[2596] _reason without miracle Could_] _reason without A miracle
should_ Hanmer. _without miracle, Reason could_ Seymour conj.

[2597] _Could_] Qq. _Should_ Ff.

_plant_] Q₂ Ff. _plaint_ Q₁ Q₃.

_majesty,--_] A full stop in F₁; comma in the rest.

[2598] _majesty,--If for_] _majesty If (for_ Pope. _majesty, (if so_
Hanmer, ending the lines _so ... speak_.

[2599] _If for_] _Seeing_ Capell conj.

[2600] _well_] Qq. _will_ Ff.

[2601] _make known_] Ff. _may know_ Qq. _May know_ [To France. Jennens.

[2602] _murder, or_] Q₁. _murder or_ Q₂. _murther, or_ Ff Q₃. _nor
other_ Singer, ed. 2 (Collier MS.), _umber, or_ S. Walker conj.
_misdeed or_ Keightley. _no slur, or_ Cartwright conj.

_burden, or_ Bailey conj.

[2603] _unchaste_] Ff. _uncleane_ Qq.

_dishonourd_] _dishonord_ Q₂. _dishonored_ F₂. _dishonoured_ The rest.

_step_] _stoop_ Collier (Collier MS.)

[2604] _grace and_] _graces_ Anon. conj.

[2605] _for want_] _the want_ Hanmer.

_I am_] _Im_ Pope.

_richer_] Ff. _rich_ Qq.

[2606] _still-soliciting_] Hyphen inserted by Theobald.

[2607] _As_] Qq. _That_ Ff.

_I have not_] _I've not_ Pope.

[2608] _Better_] Ff. _Go to, goe to, better_ Q₁. _Goe to, goe to,
better_ Q₂. _Go to, go to, better_ Q₃.

[2609] _Better ... better._] Divided as by Pope. The first line ends
_borne_, in Qq, at _hadst_, in Ff. Capell, reading with Ff, divides as
Qq.

[2610] _to have_] Qq. _t have_ F₁. _t' have_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _have_ Pope.

[2611] _but this_] Ff. _no more but this_ Qq.

[2612] _Which_] Ff. _That_ Qq.

[2613] _Which ... stand_] Arranged as in Ff. Three lines, ending
_do, ... lady?... stands,_ in Qq.

[2614] _to do_] om. Seymour conj.

[2615] _Love's_] Ff. _Love is_ Qq.

[2616] _regards that stand_] Pope. _respects that stands_ Qq. _regards,
that stands_ Ff. _regards, and stands_ Capell.

[2617] _the_] Qq. _th'_ Ff.]

_point. Will_] Steevens. _point, will_ Q₁ Ff Q₃. _point wil_ Q₂.
_point. Say will_ Pope.

[2618] _a dowry_] Ff. _and dower_ Q₁ Q₃. _and dowre_ Q₂.

[2619] _Royal ... Burgundy._] Divided as in Ff. Three lines, ending
_portion ... lake ... Burgundy,_ in Q₁ Q₃. Three lines, ending
_portion ... Cordelia ... Burgundie,_ in Q₂.

[2620] _Lear_] Q₁ Q₃. _Leir_ Q₂. _King_ Ff.

[2621] _I have sworn; I am firm._] Ff (substantially). _I have sworne._
Qq. _I've sworn._ Pope. _I've sworn; I'm firm._ Anon. conj.

[2622] _I am_] _I'm_ Pope.

[2623] _Peace ... wife._] Arranged as in Ff. Two lines, the first
ending _respects,_ in Qq.

[2624] _Burgundy_] _Burguny_ F₂.

[2625] _respects of fortune_] _respects Of fortune_ Qq. _respect and
fortunes_ Ff.

[2626] _that_] _thou_ Hanmer.

[2627] _seize_] _cease_ Q₂.

[2628] _Be it_] _Be't_ Pope.

[2629] _cold'st_] _couldst_ Q₂. _cold_ Anon. conj. MS. See note (V).

[2630] _my chance_] Ff. _thy chance_ Qq. _the chance_ Anon. conj. MS.
See note (V).

[2631] _of_] Ff. _in_ Qq.

[2632] _Can_] Ff. _Shall_ Qq.

[2633] _unkind_] _unkinn'd_ Staunton conj.

[2634] _unkind: Thou_] _unkinde, Thou_ Ff. _unkinde Thou_ Qq.

[2635] _for we ... see_] Divided as in Ff. One line in Qq.

[2636] [To Cor. Anon. conj.

[2637] _Without ... Burgundy._] Divided as in Ff. One line in Qq.

[2638] _our love_] _without our love_ Johnson conj.

[2639] [Flourish.] Ff. om. Qq.

Exeunt....] Exit Lear and Burgundy. Qq. Exeunt. Ff. Exeunt Lear,
Burgundy, Cornwal, Albany, Gloster, and Attendants. Capell.

[2640] SCENE IV. Pope.

_sisters._] _sisters?_ Q₂.

[2641] _The jewels_] _Ye jewels_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[2642] _The ... father:_] Arranged as in Ff. Four lines, ending
_father, ... are, ... faults ... father,_ in Qq.

[2643] _you what_] _what_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[2644] _Use_] Qq. _Love_ Ff.

[2645] _professed_] _professing_ Pope.

[2646] _prefer_] _perfer_ F₂.

[2647] Reg.... Gon.] Ff. Gonorill ... Regan. Qq.

_duties_] Qq. _dutie_ F₁. _duty_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[2648] _Let ... scanted,_] Arranged as in Ff. Three lines, ending
_lord, ... almes, ... scanted,_ in Qq.

[2649] _At_] _As_ Capell.

[2650] _worth ... wanted_] Ff. _worth the worth that you have wanted_
Qq. _worthy to want that you have wanted_ Hanmer. _worth the want that
you have vaunted_ Warburton. _worth the want that you have wasted_
Heath conj. _worth to want the worth that you have wanted_ Capell.
_worth to want that you have wanted_ Eccles conj. _worth the wit that
you have wanted_ Jackson conj. _worthy want that worth have wanted_
Badham conj.

[2651] _plaited_] Pope (ed. 2). _pleated_ Q₁ Q₂. _pleeted_ Q₃.
_plighted_ Ff. _pleached_ Theobald conj. (withdrawn). _plated_ Malone
conj. (withdrawn).

[2652] _cover_] Steevens. _covers_ Qq. Ff. _cover'd_ Hanmer, reading
the rest of the line as Ff. _covert_ Rann (Mason conj.), reading the
rest as Ff.

_cover faults, at_] _cover-faults at_ Singer (ed. 2), reading the rest
as Ff.

_shame them derides_] Qq. _with shame derides_ Ff. _their shame
derides_ Anon. conj.

[2653] _my_] Ff. om. Qq.

[Exeunt....] F₃ F₄. Exit.... Qq F₁ F₂.

[2654] SCENE V. Pope.

[2655] _Sister ... to-night._] Prose in Capell. Three lines, ending
_say, ... both ... to night,_ in Qq Ff.

[2656] _a little I have_] Qq. _little I have_ Ff. _little I've_ Pope.

_most_] om. Capell conj.

[2657] _hence_] _go hence_ Rowe.

[2658] _most_] om. Pope, reading as verse.

[2659] _is; the_] _is the_ Q₂.

[2660] _hath not been_] Qq. _hath beene_ Ff.

[2661] _too_] Qq F₁. _too too_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

_gross'y_] _grossely_ Ff. _grosse_ Qq.

[2662] _to receive from his age_] Qq. _from his age, to receive_ Ff.

[2663] _imperfections_] Ff. _imperfection_ Qq.

_ingrafted_] Qq. _ingraffed_ F₁ F₂. _engraffed_ F₃ F₄.

[2664] _the_] Ff. om. Qq.

[2665] _starts_] Q₂ Ff. _stars_ Q₁ Q₃.

[2666] _There is_] _Then his_ Anon. conj.

_compliment_] _complement_ Qq Ff. _the compliment_ Anon. conj.

[2667] _France_] _Burgundy_ Hanmer.

_Pray you_] Ff. _Pray_ Qq.

_let's hit_] _lets hit_ Qq. _let us sit_ Ff. _let us hit_ Theobald.

[2668] _authority with_] _authority, with_ Hanmer.

_dispositions_] Qq. _disposition_ Ff.

[2669] _on't_] Qq. _of it_ Ff.

[2670] SCENE II.] om. Rowe. SCENE VI. Pope. The whole scene is
transferred to the beginning of ACT II. by Eccles.

The ... castle.] A Castle belonging to the Earl of Glo'ster. Pope. A
Hall in the Earl of Gloster's Castle. Capell.

Enter ... letter.] Theobald. Enter Bastard solus. Qq. Enter Bastard. Ff.

[2671] _Thou ... news?_] Verse in Ff. Prose in Qq.

[2672] _in_] _to_ Hanmer.

_plague_] _plage_ Warburton. _place_ Simpson conj.

[2673] _curiosity_] _nicety_ Pope. _curtesie_ Theobald (Thirlby conj.)

[2674] _Why ... base?_] _and why bastard? base?_ Hanmer.

[2675] _dimensions_] Ff. _dementions_ Qq.

[2676] _As ... base?_] Arranged as in Ff. Jennens, reading as Qq, ends
the lines _issue?... bastardy?_

[2677] _With ... base?_] _With Base? With basenes Bastardie? Base,
Base?_ F₁ and substantially F₂ F₃ F₄. _with base, base bastardy?_ Qq
(_bastardie?_ Q₂).

[2678] _dull, stale_] Ff. _stale dull_ Qq.

_tired_] _tyred_ Ff. _lied_ Q₁ Q₃. _lyed_ Q₂.

[2679] _the creating_] _th' creating_ Ff. _the creating of_ Qq.
_creating_ Pope.

[2680] _'tween asleep_] _atween sleep_ Dodd conj.

_asleep_] _a-sleep_ Pope. _a sleepe_ Q₂ F₁ F₂ _a sleep_ F₃ F₄ _sleepe_
Q₁. _sleep_ Q₃.

_then,_] Ff _the_ Qq _then, good brother,_ Hanmer.

[2681] _fine word, 'legitimate!'_] Ff. Omitted in Qq.

[2682] _top the_] Capell. _tooth'_ Qq. _to' th'_ F₁ F₂. _to th'_ F₃ F₄.
_be th'_ Pope, ed. 2 (Theobald). _toe th'_ Hanmer. _out th'_ or _rout
th'_ Jennens conj. _foe the_ Mason conj.

_legitimate._] _legitimate:_ Qq Ff. _legitimate--_ Rowe, reading _to
th'_ with F₃ F₄.

[2683] SCENE VII. Pope.

[2684] _Kent ... gad!_] Put in the margin by Eccles.

[2685] _subscribed_] _subscrib'd_ Q₁ Q₃. _subscribd_ Q₂. _Perscrib'd_
Ff.

[2686] _this done_] Q₁ F₁ Q₃. _this donne_ Q₂. _this gone_ F₂ F₃ F₄.
_is gone_ Pope.

[2687] [Putting....] Rowe. om. Qq Ff.

[2688] _Why_] _Whe_ F₂.

[2689] _needed_] Ff. _needs_ Q₁ Q₃. _needes_ Q₂.

_terrible_] _terribe_ Q₂.

[2690] _hide_] _hid_ Q₃.

[2691] Edm.] Bast. Q₁ Ff Q₃. Ba. Q₂. (Cap. Dev. Mus. per. and Bodl. 1,
2). om. Q₂ (Mus. imp.)

[2692] _and_] Ff. om. Qq.

[2693] _o'er-looking_] _ore-looking_ Ff. _liking_ Qq. _overlooking_
Warburton.

[2694] _I ... blame._] Prose in Qq Three lines ending _it: ... them ...
blame,_ in Ff.

[2695] _to blame_] Q₃ F₃ F₄. _too blame_ Q₁ Q₂ F₁ F₂.

[2696] _essay or taste_] _assay or test_ Johnson conj.

[2697] [Reads] Ff. A Letter. Qq.

_and reverence_] Ff. Omitted in Qq. _in reverence_ Hanmer.

_age_] _ages_ Pope (ed. 2).

[2698] _to the best_] _to best_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[2699] _who_] _which_ Rowe.

[2700] _Sleep_] F₃ F₄. _sleepe_ F₁ F₂. _slept_ Qq.]

_waked_] _wakt_ Qq. _wake_ Ff.

[2701] _brain_] _a brain_ Rowe.

[2702] _this to you_] Qq F₃ F₄. _you to this_ F₁ F₂.

[2703] _were his ... were not._] _was his ... is not._ Seymour conj.

[2704] _his ... respect of_] _his but in respect, of_ Q₂.

[2705] _It is his._] Ff. _It is his?_ Q₂. _Is it his?_ Q₁ Q₃.

[2706] _but_] Qq F₁. om. F₂ F₃ F₄.

[2707] _Hath_] Qq. _Has_ Ff.

_heretofore_] Qq. _before_ Ff.

[2708] _heard him oft_] Ff. _often heard him_ Qq.

[2709] _at_] _being at_ Hanmer.

_perfect_] _perfit_ Q₁.

_declining_] Qq. _declin'd_ F₁ F₃ F₄. _declind_ F₂.

[2710] _the father_] Ff. _his father_ Qq.

_as ward_] _as a ward_ Q₃.

[2711] _his_] Ff. _the_ Qq.

[2712] _sirrah_] Ff. _sir_ Qq.

_ay,_] _I,_ Q₁ Q₃. _I_ Q₂. _Ile_ F₁ F₂. _I'le_ F₃ F₄. om. Anon. conj.
MS. See note (V).

[2713] _lord_] _L._ F₁ F₂.

[2714] _his_] Ff. _this_ Qq.

[2715] _should_] Q₂ Ff (_shold_ F₁). _shal_ Q₁. _shall_ Q₃.

[2716] _own_] om. F₂ F₃ F₄.

[2717] _that_] Ff. om. Qq.

[2718] _wrote_] Qq. _writ_ Ff.

[2719] _further_] Qq. om. Ff.

[2720] _auricular_] Ff. _aurigular_ Qq.

[2721] _monster--_] Dyce. _monster._ Qq Ff.

[2722] Edm. _Nor ... earth!_] Qq. Omitted in Ff.

[2723] _me_] _you_ Johnson conj. (withdrawn).

[2724] _him, I pray you: frame_] Ff. _him, I pray you frame_ Qq.

_the_] Ff. _your_ Qq.

[2725] _will_] Ff. _shall_ Qq.

[2726] _find_] Ff. _see_ Qq.

[2727] _eclipses_] _elipses_ F₂.

[2728] _moon_] _the moon_ Capell conj.

[2729] _the wisdom of nature_] _your wisdom_ Lettsom conj.

_nature_] _mankind_ Hanmer. _man_ Keightley (Lettsom conj.)

_it_] Ff. om. Qq.

[2730] _sequent_] _frequent_ Theobald.

[2731] _discord_] Ff. _discords_ Qq.

_in palaces_] _pallaces_ Q₁ Q₂. _pallcies_ Q₃.

[2732] _treason_] _treasons_ Qq.

_and the bond_] Ff. _the bond_ Qq.

_'twixt_] Ff. _betweene_ Qq.

[2733] _This villain ... graves._] Ff. Omitted in Qq.

[2734] _villain_] _villanie_ Q₃.

[2735] _honesty_] Ff. _honest_ Qq.

_'Tis strange_] Ff. _strange, strange!_ Q₁. _Strange strange!_ Q₂.
_Straing, strange!_ Q₃.

[Exit.] Ff. om. Qq.

[2736] SCENE VIII. Pope.

[2737] _surfeit_] Q₂. _surfet_ Q₁ Q₃. _surfets_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _surfeits_
F₄. _forfeit_ Collier conj.

[2738] _the stars_] Qq. _starres_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _stars_ F₄.

_by_] Qq. _on_ Ff.

[2739] _treachers_] Ff. _trecherers_ Qq. _treacherous_ Pope.

[2740] _spherical_] F₃ F₄. _sphericall_ F₁. _sphæricall_ F₂.
_spirituall_ Qq.

[2741] _disposition to_] Qq. _disposition on_ Ff.

_to the charge_] _on the charge_ Pope, _on the change_ Warburton.

_a star_] F₃ F₄. _a starre_ F₁ F₂. _stars_ Q₁. _starres_ Q₂. _hars_ Q₃.

[2742] _lecherous_] _treacherous_ Theobald conj. (withdrawn).]

_Tut_] Steevens. _Fut_ Q₁ Q₂. _But_ Q₃. om. Ff.

_that_] _what_ Pope.

[2743] _maidenliest_] F₃ F₄. _maidenlest_ Q₁ Q₂ F₁ F₂. _maidenleast_ Q₃.

_in_] Ff. _of_ Qq.

_bastardizing_] Ff. _bastardy_ Qq.

[2744] _Edgar-- ... And pat_] Steevens (1778). _Edgar_, Enter Edgar. _&
out_ Q₁ Q₃. _Edgar; and out_ Q₂ (Enter Edgar, in margin). Enter Edgar.
_Pat:_ Ff. Enter Edgar. _Edgar! Pat;_ Capell. _Edgar--_Enter Edgar.
_Pat!--_ Steevens (1773).

[2745] _Edgar-- ... divisions!_] Marked as 'Aside' by Capell.

[2746] SCENE IX. Pope.

[2747] _my cue_] Ff. _mine_ Qq.

_sigh_] _sighe_ F₁. _sith_ Q₂.

_Tom o'_] Ff. _them of_ Qq.

[2748] _do portend_] _portent_ Q₃. _portend_ Pope.

[2749] _fa, ... mi._] _fa, ... me._ Ff. Omitted in Qq.

[2750] [Humming. Hanmer.

[2751] _about_] Qq. _with_ Ff.

[2752] _you_] Qq F₁. om. F₂ F₃ F₄.

_writ_] Qq. _writes_ Ff.

[2753] _as of ... Come, come;_] Qq. Omitted in Ff.

[2754] _amities_] Q₂. _armies_ Q₁ Q₃.

[2755] _cohorts_] Qq. _courts_ Steevens 1773 (as misquoted by Johnson
in note). _comforts_ Jennens.

[2756] _Why, the_] Q₂. _Why the_ Q₁ Q₃. _The_ Ff.

[2757] _Ay,_] _I,_ Ff. om. Qq.

[2758] _or_] Qq. _nor_ Ff.

[2759] _may_] om. F₃ F₄.

[2760] _till_] Qq. _untill_ F₁ F₂. _until_ F₃ F₄.

[2761] _with_] _without_ Hanmer. _but with_ Johnson conj.

[2762] _person_] _parson_ Q₂.

_scarcely_] Ff. _scarse_ Q₁ Q₃. _scarce_ Q₂.

[2763] _fear_ ... Edm. _Brother,_] Ff. _feare brother,_ Qq (omitting
the rest).

[2764] _pray ye_] _pray you_ Rowe.

[2765] _go armed_] Qq. Omitted in Ff.

[2766] _towards_] Qq. _toward_ Ff.

[2767] _heard; but faintly,_] _heard, but faintly,_ Qq. _heard: But
faintly._ Ff. _heard, but faintly;_ Pope.

[2768] SCENE X. Pope.

_I do_] _I_ Pope. _I'll_ Heath conj.

[Exit Edgar.] Exit Fdgar. Q₂. Exit Edgar. Q₁ Q₃ (after line 167). Exit.
Ff (after line 167).

[2769] _All with me's_] _All's with me_ Capell conj.

[2770] SCENE III.] SCENE II. Rowe and Eccles. SCENE XI. Pope.

The ...] Rowe. A room in the ... Capell.

Oswald, her Steward.] Collier, a Gentleman. Q₁ Q₃. Gentleman. Q₂.
Steward. Ff.

[2771] Osw.] Collier. Gent. Qq. Ste. F₁ Stew. F₂ F₃ F₄.

[2772] _Yes_] Qq. _I_ Ff. _Ay_ Rowe.

[2773] _night_] Qq. _night,_ Ff. _night!_ Capell.

[2774] _every ... other,_] Divided as in Ff. One line in Qq.

[2775] _upbraids_] _obrayds_ Q₂.

[2776] _trifle. When_] Ff. _trifle when_ Qq (_trifell_ Q₂).

[2777] [Horns within.] Capell. om. Qq Ff.

[2778] _Put on ... one,_] Verse in Ff. Prose in Qq.

[2779] _weary_] _wary_ Anon. conj. (Gent. Mag. LX. 402).

[2780] _fellows_] F₃ F₄. _fellowes_ F₁ F₂. _fellow-servants_ Q₁ Q₃.
_fellow servants_ Q₂.

_to_] Ff. _in_ Qq.

[2781] _distaste_] Ff. _dislike_ Qq.

_our_] Qq. _my_ Ff.

[2782] _Not to be ... abused._] Verse first by Theobald. Prose in Qq.
Omitted in Ff, Rowe, Pope and Hanmer.

[2783] _fools_] _folks_ Warburton.

[2784] _checks ... abused_] _checks; as flatteries, when they are seen,
are abus'd_ Keightley.

_as ... abused_] Qq. _like flatt'rers when they're seen t' abuse
us._ Theobald. _as flatteries, when they are seen abuses._ or _as
flatteries when they are seen t' abuse us._ Theobald conj. (withdrawn).
_not flatt'ries when they're seen abused._ Warburton. _by flatteries
when they're seen abused._ Jennens. _of flatteries when they're seen
abused._ Badham conj. Halliwell supposes that a line is omitted.

[2785] _tell you_] Qq. _have said_ Ff. _have said to you_ Keightley.

_Very well_] Qq. _Well_ Ff.

[2786] _And let ... so:_] As in Capell. Verse first by Hanmer. Prose in
Qq Ff.

[2787] _advise_] _and advise_ Hanmer, ending the line _advise._

[2788] _I would ... speak:_] As in Capell. Prose in Qq. Omitted in Ff,
and subsequent editions down to Johnson's.

[2789] _I'll ... dinner._] As in Hanmer. Prose in Qq Ff.

[2790] _very_] Qq. om. Ff.

[Exeunt.] Qq. Exit. Ff.

_Prepare_] Ff. _goe prepare_ Q₁ Q₂. _go prepare_ Q₃. _Go and prepare_
Hanmer.

_dinner_] _dinner now_ Keightley.

[2791] SCENE IV.] Rowe continues the scene. SCENE XII. Pope. SCENE III.
Eccles.

A hall in the same.] Malone. An outer Hall in the same. Capell. An open
Place before the Palace. Theobald.

Enter Kent, disguised.] Rowe. Enter Kent. Qq Ff.

[2792] _If ... labours._] Verse in Ff. Prose in Qq.

[2793] _well_] _will_ F₁.

[2794] _That ... defuse_] Qq Ff. _And ... disuse_ Rowe. _And ...
diffuse_ Theobald. _That ... deface_ Capell. _That ... diffuse_
Steevens. _That ... disuse_ Long MS. _That ... disguise_ Jennens conj.
_That ... defeat_ Anon. conj.

[2795] _razed_] _raz'd_ Q₂. _raizd_ Q₁ Q₃. _raiz'd_ F₁ F₂. _rais'd_ F₃
F₄.

_Now_] om. Pope.

[2796] _So ... come,_] Ff. Omitted in Qq.

[2797] _thee full_] _the full_ Q₁ Q₂.

_labours_] Ff. _labour_ Qq.

Horns within.] Omitted in Qq.

Knights, and Attendants.] Rowe. and Attendants. Ff. Omitted in Qq.
Gentleman, Knights, and Attendants. Capell.

[2798] [Exit an Attendant.] To an Attendant, who goes out. Capell. om.
Qq Ff.

[To Kent. Theobald.

[2799] _and says_] _to say_ Hanmer (Warburton).

[2800] _art_] _are_ F₂.

[2801] _be_] Qq. _be'st_ F₁ F₃ F₄. _best_ F₂.

_he is_] Qq. _he's_ Ff.

[2802] _thou art_] _thar't_ Q₂.

[2803] _Who_] Qq F₁. _Whom_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[2804] _What's_] _What's is_ Q₃.

[2805] _services_] _service_ Q₃.

_thou_] om. Q₂.

[2806] _counsel_] _counsaile_ Q₁ Q₂ F₁. _counsaill_ Q₃. _counsailes_
F₂. _counsels_ F₃ F₄.

[2807] _sir_] Ff. om. Qq.

_singing_] _sighing_ Anon. conj.

[2808] _thou_] _that_ F₂.

[2809] _me: if ... dinner, I_] _me; if ... dinner, I_ Rowe. _me, if ...
dinner, I_ Qq Ff. _me, if ... dinner. I_ Jennens.

[2810] _from ... dinner!_] _from thee. Yet no dinner ho? dinner--_
Hanmer.

_Dinner, ho, dinner_] _Dinner, ho dinner_ Q₂.

[2811] _hither_] _hether_ Q₁ Q₂.

[To an Attendant. Capell.

[Exit....] Dyce.

[2812] Enter Oswald.] Enter Steward. Capell. Enter Steward (after
_daughter?_). Qq Ff. Enter Steward (after _fool?_). Johnson.

[2813] _You, you,_] F₃ F₄. _You you_ F₁ F₂. _You_ Qq.

[2814] Osw.] Collier. Steward Qq. Ste. F₁. Stew. F₂ F₃ F₄.

_you,--_] _you--_ Q₁ Ff Q₃. _you,_ Q₂.

[Exit.] Ff. om. Qq.

[2815] _clotpoll_] _clotpole_ Ff. _clat-pole_ Qq. clodpoll Johnson.

[2816] [Exit a Knight.] Dyce. om. Qq Ff.

_fool, ho?_] _fool? Ho!_ Rowe. _foole? ho,_ Q₁ Q₃. _foole, ho_ Q₂.
_foole? Ho,_ Ff.

[2817] _world's_] _worlds_ F₂.

Re-enter Knight.] Dyce. om. Qq Ff.

[2818] Knight.] F₄. Knigh. F₁ F₂ F₃. Kent. Qq.

_daughter_] _daughters_ F₁ F₂.

[2819] Knight.] F₄. Knigh. F₁ F₂ F₃. Servant. Qq.

[2820] _me_] om. F₃ F₄.

[2821] _He_] _A_ Q₂.

[2822] _of kindness_] Omitted in Qq.

_dependants_] _dependance_ S. Walker conj.

[2823] _wronged_] _is wrong'd_ Q₁ Q₃.

[2824] _mine_] _my_ F₃ F₄.

[2825] _faint_] _fain_ Becket conj.

[2826] _mine own_] _my own_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[2827] _purpose_] Ff. _purport_ Qq.

[2828] _into 't_ Q₂ F₂ F₃ F₄. _into it_ Q₁ Q₃. _intoo't_ F₁.

_where's_] _wheres_ F₂.

_my_] Ff. _this_ Qq.

[2829] _this_] _these_ Pope.

[2830] Knight.] Ff. Servant. Qq.

[2831] _well_] Ff. om. Qq.

[To one Attendant. Capell.

[2832] [Exit an Attendant.] Dyce. om. Qq Ff.

[2833] [to Another. Capell.

[Exit....] Dyce. om. Qq Ff.

Re-enter Oswald.] Re-enter Steward, brought back by an Attendant.
Capell (after _O,_ line 75). Enter Steward. Ff (after _sir?_ line 75).
Omitted in Qq.

[2834] _you, come ... sir_] Ff. _you sir, come you hither_ Qq.
_come ... sir_ Rowe.

[2835] _I am ... pardon._] Two lines in Ff.

[2836] _these_] Ff. _this_ Qq.

[2837] _your pardon_] Ff. _you pardon me_ Qq.

[2838] _looks_] _locks_ Becket conj.

[Striking him.] Rowe. om. Qq Ff, and Capell.

[2839] _struck_] Q₂. _strucke_ Q₁ Q₃. _strucken_ Ff.

[in Posture of defending himself. Capell.

[2840] _player._] _player?_ Hanmer.

[Tripping ... heels.] Rowe. om. Qq Ff.

[2841] _I ... thee._] Two lines in Ff.

[2842] _arise, away_] Ff. Omitted in Qq.

[2843] _lubber's length_] _lubbers length_ Q₂ (Cap. & Dev.) _lubbers,
length_ Q₂ (Mus. per. & imp. & Bodl. 1, 2). _lubbers-length_ Anon.
conj. MS. See note (V).

[2844] _tarry_] _tarry again_ Theobald (ed. 2).

_go to_] Omitted in Qq.

_have you wisdom? so._] Theobald. _have you wisedome, so._ Ff. _you
have wisedome._ Qq.

[Pushes....] Pushes the Steward out. Theobald. om. Qq Ff.

[2845] _my_] Ff. om. Qq.

_there's_] _their's_ Q₂.

[2846] [Giving....] Capell. Giving money. Johnson. om. Qq Ff.

[2847] SCENE XIII. Pope.

[Offering....] Offering his cap. Capell. Giving his cap. Rowe. om. Qq
Ff.

[2848] Kent. _Why, fool?_] Kent. _Why foole?_ Qq. Lear. _Why my Boy?_
Ff.

[2849] _Why, for_] _Why for_ Qq. _Why? for_ Ff.

_one's_] _on's_ Q₂.

_that's_] _that is_ F₄.

[2850] _an_] Pope. & F₁. _and_ The rest. _as_ Warburton.

_thou'lt_] Ff. _thou't_ Qq.

[2851] _hath_] Qq. _ha's_ F₁. _has_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[2852] _on's_] _of his_ Q₁ Q₃.

_done_] Qq. _did_ Ff.

[2853] _and two_] _an' two_ (i.e. _if two_) Farmer conj.

[2854] _gave_] _give_ F₃ F₄.

_all my_] Ff. _any_ Qq.

_I'ld_] _I'll_ Rowe.

_coxcombs_] Q₂. _coxcombes_ F₁. _coxcombe_ Q₁ Q₃ F₂. _coxcomb_ F₃ F₄.

[2855] _Truth's a_] Ff. _Truth is, a_ Q₁. _Truth is a_ Q₂ Q₃.

_must to_] Ff. _that must to_ Qq.

[2856] _Lady the brach_] _lady, the brach,_ Malone (Steevens). _Lady
oth'e brach_ Q₁ Q₃. _Ladie oth'e brach_ Q₂. _the Lady Brach_ Ff. _the
lady's brach_ Letherland conj. _Lie the brach_ Archibald Smith conj.

[2857] _gall_] Ff. _gull_ Qq.

[2858] [To Kent. Rowe.

[2859] Lear] Ken. Capell.

[2860] _nuncle_] _unckle_ Q₁ Q₃. _uncle_ Q₂.

[2861] _Have ... score._] As in Ff. Prose in Qq.

[2862] _in-a-door_] Capell. _in a doore_ Qq. _in a dore_ F₁ F₂. _in
dore_ F₃. _in door_ F₄. _within door_ Pope.

[2863] Kent.] Ff. Lear. Qq.

[2864] _'tis_] F₁ F₂ F₃. om. Qq. _it is_ F₄.

[2865] _gave_] _give_ F₃ F₄.

[2866] _nuncle_] Ff. _uncle_ Qq.

[2867] [To Kent] Rowe. om. Qq Ff.

[2868] Lear. _A ... teach me._] Put in the margin by Pope, who omits
altogether lines 135-142. Hanmer puts lines 131-142 in the margin.

[2869] _my boy_] _nuncle_ Capell.

[2870] _sweet fool_] Qq. _sweet one_ Ff.

[2871] [Sings. Anon. conj.

[2872] _That lord ... snatching._] Omitted in Ff.

[2873] _That lord ... there._] Eight lines in Capell. Four in Qq.

[2874] _Do_] _Or do_ Hanmer (in margin) and Capell. _And do_ Grant
White.

_thou_] _thou there_ Edd. conj.

[2875] _boy_] om. Pope.

[2876] _out_] Qq. _on't_ Pope.

[2877] _on't: and ladies too,_] Capell. _on't, and lodes too,_ Q₁ Q₃.
_an't, and lodes too,_ Q₂ (Cap. and Dev.) _an't, and Ladies too_, Q₂
(Bodl. 1, 2. Mus. per. and imp.) _on 't: nay the ladies too,_ Pope.
_on't: and the ladies too,_ Steevens (1773). _on't, and loads too:_
Collier.

[2878] _they will_] _they'll_ Pope.

_all the fool_] Q₂. _all foole_ Q₁ Q₃

[2879] _Give ... egg, nuncle_] Qq. _Nunckle, give me an egge_ Ff.

[2880] _in the_] Qq. _i' th'_ F₁ F₃ F₄. _ith'_ F₂.

[2881] _crown_] _crownes_ F₁.

_i' the_] _it'h_ Q₂. _i' th'_ F₁ F₃ F₄. _ith'_ F₂. _in the_ Q₁ Q₃.

[2882] _borest_] Qq. _boar'st_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _bor'st_ F₄.

_on thy_] _at'h_ Q₂. _at thy_ Anon. conj. MS. See note (V).

_o'er_] over Capell.

[2883] _one_] _crown_ Johnson.

[2884] _so_] _sooth_ Warburton.

[2885] [Singing] Rowe. om. Qq Ff.

[2886] _had ne'er_] _ne'er had_ Pope.

_wit_] Qq. _grace_ Ff.

[2887] _And_] Ff. _They_ Qq.

_know not how_] _well may fear_ Collier MS.]

_to_] Ff. _do_ Q₁ Q₃. _doe_ Q₂.

[2888] _When_] _Since when_ Hanmer.

[2889] _ever_] Qq. _ere_ F₁ F₂. _e're_ F₃ F₄.

[2890] _mother_] Qq. _mothers_ Ff.

[2891] _Then they_] First printed as part of the song by Theobald. As
prose in Ff.

[2892] _for ... among._] Verse in Ff. Prose in Qq.

[2893] _fools_] F₃ F₄. _fooles_ Qq. _foole_ F₁ F₂.

[2894] _learn to lie_] _learne to lye_ Q₂ (Bodl. 1, 2. Mus. per. and
imp.) _learne lye_ Q₂ (Cap. and Dev.)].

[2895] _An_] Knight. _And_ Q₂ Ff. _If_ Q₁ Q₃.

_sirrah_] Omitted in Qq.

[2896] _thou'lt_] Ff. _thou wilt_ Qq.

[2897] _sometimes_] Ff. _sometime_ Qq.

[2898] _o'_] Ff. _of_ Qq.

[2899] _o'_ both] Ff _a both_ Qq.

_i' the_] _i' th'_ Ff. _in the_ Qq.

_Here_] _Heare_ F₂.

[2900] _o' the_] _of the_ Capell.

[2901] SCENE XIV. Pope.

[2902] _How ... frown._] Prose in Ff. Two lines in Qq.

[2903] _daughter_] _our daughter_ Keightley.

_on?_] Ff. _on,_ Qq.

[2904] _Methinks_] Omitted in Ff.

_of late_] Ff. _alate_ Qq.

[2905] _frowning_] Ff. _frowne_ Qq.

_now thou_] Q₂ (Bodl. 1, 2. Mus. per. and imp.) Ff. _thou_, _thou_ Q₁
Q₂ (Cap. and Dev.) Q₃.

[2906] [To Gon.] Pope. om. Qq Ff.

[2907] _Mum, mum:_] Omitted by Pope.

[Singing. Rowe.

[2908] _nor crust_] Ff. _neither crust_ Qq.

[2909] [Pointing to Lear] Johnson. Speaking to Lear. Warburton. To
Kent, shewing Lear. Capell.

_That's_] _Thou art_ Warburton.

_shealed_] _shell'd_ Capell.

_peascod_] Pope (ed. 2). _pescod_ Qq Ff.

[2910] _Not ... proceeding_] Verse in Ff. Prose in Qq.

[2911] _this_] _thus_ Johnson.

[2912] _other_] _others_ Johnson.

[2913] _and ... riots. Sir,_] Pointed as by Capell. _(not ... riots)
Sir,_ Q₁. _(not ... riots,) Sir_ Q₂. _(not ... endur'd) riots Sir._ F₁
and F₂ F₃ F₄ substantially. _(not ... riots) Sir_ Q₃.

_Sir,_] om. Theobald.

[2914] _had_] om. Pope.

[2915] _put it on_] Ff. _put on_ Qq.

[2916] _which_] om. Pope.

[2917] _if you should ... Would_] _did you not ... Would or if you
should ... Shall_ Seymour conj.

[2918] _redresses_] Ff. _redresse_ Q₁ Q₃. _redresse,_ Q₂.

[2919] _Which_] Ff. _that_ Qq.

[2920] _Will_] Ff. _must_ Qq.

_proceeding_] Ff. _proceedings_ Qq.

[2921] _know_] Ff. _trow_ Qq.

[2922] _The ... young._] As verse first by Pope. Prose in Qq Ff.

[2923] _it had it head_] Qq. _it's had it head_ F₁. _it had its head_
F₂. _it had it's head_ F₃ F₄.

_by it_] F₁ F₂. _beit_ Q₁ Q₂. _be it_ Q₃. _by it's_ F₃ F₄.

[2924] _Come, sir,_] Omitted in Ff.

[2925] _I ... are._] Verse in Ff. Prose in Qq.

[2926] _that_] Qq. _your_ Ff.

[2927] _Whereof_] _Wherewith_ Jennens conj.

[2928] _that ... transform_] Qq. _which ... transport_ Ff.

[2929] _Doth ... am?_] Verse in Ff. Prose in Qq.

[2930] _Doth_] Qq. _Do's_ F₁ F₃ F₄. _Dos_ F₂.

_Doth ... Lear:_] One line in Rowe. Two in Ff.

_This_] Ff. _why this_ Qq.

[2931] _Doth_] Qq. _Do's_ Ff.

[2932] _notion weakens_] Ff. _notion, weaknesse,_ Q₁ Q₃. _notion,
weaknes_ Q₂.

_his discernings_] Ff. _or his discernings_ Qq. _or's discernings_ S.
Walker conj.

[2933] _lethargied--_] Rowe. _lethargied._ Ff. _lethergy,_ Q₁ Q₃.
_lethergie,_ Q₂.

_lethargied--Ha! waking_] _lethargied or waking_ Edwards conj.

_Ha! waking?_] _sleeping or waking; ha! sure_ Qq.

[2934] _is it that_] _is it then_ Roderick conj. _is't_ S. Walker conj.

[2935] Fool. _Lear's shadow._] Pointed as in Ff. _Lears shadow?_ Qq
(continuing it to 'Lear'). Omitted by Rann. Fool. _Lear's shadow,--_
Singer.

[2936] Lear. _I would ... father._] Steevens (1773). _I would ...
father._ Qq. Omitted in Ff. See note (VII).

[2937] _that_] om. Pope.

_sovereignty_] _substantiality_ Jennens.

[2938] _false_] _fast_ Jennens. _halfe_ Anon. conj. MS. See note (V).

_persuaded I_] _persuaded.--I_ Tyrwhitt conj. _persuaded That I_ S.
Walker conj.

[2939] Fool. _Which ... father._ Lear.] Omitted by Pope. See note (VII).

[2940] _Which they will_] Q₃. _Which they, will_ Q₁ Q₂. _Which of thee
will_ Jennens.

[2941] _This ... daughter._] Verse in Ff. Prose in Qq.

[2942] _This admiration, sir,_] Ff. _Come sir, this admiration_ Qq.
_Come, sir; This admiration_ Steevens (1778).

_o' the_] _o' th'_ F₁ F₃ F₄. _oth'_ F₂. _of the_ Qq.

_savour_] Q₁ Q₂ Ff. _favour_ Q₃ and Capell.

[2943] _To_] Ff. om. Qq.

_aright:_] _aright,_ Boswell conj., reading line 233 with Ff.

[2944] _As ... you should_] Q₁ Q₃. _As you are old and reverend,
should_ Q₂. _As you are old, and reverend, should_ Ff. _You, as you
are old and reverend, should_ Rowe. _You, as you're old and rev'rend,
should_ Pope. _Being old ... you should_ Seymour conj.

_you should_] om. Steevens conj.

[2945] _a hundred_] Ff. _a_ 100. Q₂. _one hundred_ Q₁ Q₃.

[2946] _debosh'd_] Ff. _deboyst_ Qq. _debauch'd_ Pope.

[2947] _a riotous inn_] _an inn_ Steevens conj.

[2948] _Make it more_] Rowe. _make more_ Qq. _Makes it more_ Ff.

_a brothel_] _a brothell_ Ff. _brothell_ Qq.

[2949] _graced_] _grac'd_ Ff. _great_ Qq.

_The_] om. Pope.

[2950] _then_] Ff. _thou_ Qq. _you_ Anon. conj. MS. See note (V).

[2951] _A little_] _Of fifty_ Pope.

[2952] _remainder_] Qq. _remainders_ Ff.

[2953] _Which_] Ff. _and_ Q₁ Q₃. _that_ Q₂.

[2954] _You ... betters._] Verse first in Rowe (ed. 2). Prose in Qq Ff.

[2955] Enter Albany.] Ff. Enter Duke. Qq.

[2956] SCENE XV. Pope. The rest of the Scene, except lines 340, 341, is
prose in Qq.

_Woe, ... repents,--_] _Woe!... repents--_ Rowe. _Woe, ... repents:_
Ff. _We that too late repent's us;_ Q₁ Q₃. _We that too late repent's,_
Q₂. _We ... repent._ Anon. conj. MS. _Fool! that too late repent'st--_
Jennens. _Woe's him that too late repents--_ Keightley. See note (V).

[To Alb.] Rowe. om. Qq Ff.

_O, sir ... come?_] Qq. Omitted in Ff, and restored by Theobald.

[2957] _will?... Prepare my_] Ff. _will that we prepare any_ Qq (_wee_
Q₂. _prepar_ Q₃).

[2958] _Than the_] _Than i' th'_ Upton conj.

[2959] Alb. _Pray, sir, be patient._ Lear.] Ff. Omitted in Qq.

[2960] _sir_] _you, sir_ Hanmer.

[2961] [To Gon.] Rowe. om. Qq Ff.

[2962] _liest. My train are_] _lessen my traine and_ Q₁ Q₃. _list my
traine, and_ Q₂.

[2963] _worships_] _worship_ Collier MS.

_name_] _names_ Rowe.

[2964] _That_] Qq. _Which_ Ff.

[2965] _Lear, Lear, Lear!_] As in Ff. Twice in Qq.

[2966] [Striking his head.] Pope. om. Qq Ff.

[2967] _dear_] _clear_ Anon. conj.

_Go ... people._] Ff. _Goe, goe, my people?_ Q₁ Q₂. _Go, go; my
people!_ Q₃. _Go, go:--my people!_ Malone conj.

[2968] _I am ... I am_] _I'm ... I'm_ Pope.

[2969] _Of what ... you._] Ff. Omitted in Qq.

[2970] _It ... fruitful!_] Three lines in Malone, ending _nature,
hear! ... if ... fruitful!_

[2971] _Hear_] F₃ F₄. _Heare_ F₁ F₂ _harke_ Qq.

_nature, hear; dear_] _Nature! hear, dear_ Grant White.

_hear; dear_] Warburton. _heare deere_ Qq F₁ F₂. _hear dear_ F₃. _hear,
dear_ F₄.

_hear!_] om. Qq. _hear a father!_ Pope.

[2972] _derogate_] _degenerate_ Anon. MS. See note (V).

[2973] _thwart_] Ff. _thourt_ Qq.

_disnatured_] _disnatur'd_ Ff. _disnetur'd_ Q₁ Q₂. _disventur'd_ Q₃.
_disfeatur'd_ Henderson and Anon. MS. See note (V).

[2974] _cadent_] Ff. _accent_ Q₁ Q₂. _accient_ Q₃. _candent_ Theobald
(Warburton). _acrid_ or _ardent_ Anon. conj.

[2975] _mother's pains_] _mother pains_ Becket conj.

[2976] _feel_] _feele, that she may feele,_ Q₂.

[2977] _Away, away!_] _Away, away._ Ff. _goe, goe, my people?_ Qq.

[Exit.] Ff. om. Qq.

[2978] _Now ... this?_] Two lines in Ff.

_whereof_] _wherefore_ Johnson.

[2979] _the cause_] Qq. _more of it_ F₁. _of it_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _of what_
Hanmer.

[2980] _That_] _that_ Qq. _As_ Ff.

_dotage_] _fretfulness and wayward dotage_ Seymour conj.

Re-enter Lear.] Steevens. Enter Lear. Ff. Omitted in Qq.

[2981] _What's_] Ff. _What is_ Qq.

[2982] _I'll ... ashamed_] One line in Rowe. Two in Ff.

[To Gon.] Theobald.

[2983] _which_] Ff. _that_ Qq.

[2984] _Should ... thee!_] One line in Rowe. Two in Ff.

_thee worth them. Blasts_] _thee worth them, Blastes_ Ff. _the worst
blasts_ Qq.

[2985] _upon thee! The untented_] _upon thee: Th' untented_ Ff. _upon
the untender_ Q₁ Q₂ (Cap. and Dev.) Q₃. _upon the untented_ Q₂ (Bodl.
1, 2. Mus. per. and imp.) _upon the untainted_ Anon. conj. MS. See note
(V). _upon thee! The unshented_ Becket conj. _upon thee! The indented_
Jackson conj.

[2986] _Pierce_] Ff. _pierce_ Q₂ (Bodl. 1, 2. Mus. per. and imp.)
_peruse_ Q₁ Q₂ (Cap. and Dev.) Q₃.

_sense_] _fence_ Warburton.

_thee! Old_] _thee. Old_ Ff. _the olde_ Q₁ _the old_ Q₂ Q₃.

[2987] _this cause_] Qq F₁. _thee once_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _her once_ Rowe.

_ye_] Ff. _you_ Qq.

[2988] _cast you_] Ff. _you cast_ Qq.

_lose_] F₃ F₄. _loose_ F₁ F₂. _make_ Qq.

[2989] _Yea, is it come to this?_] Q₁ Q₃. _yea, i'st come to this?_ Q₂.
_Ha?_ Ff. _Ha! is it come to this?_ Pope.

[2990] _Let it be so:_] Ff (ending line 298 at _so_). Omitted in Qq.
Arranged as by Pope.

_yet have I left a_] Qq. _I have another_ Ff.

[2991] _Who_] Ff. _whom_ Qq.

[2992] _flay_] Malone. _fley_ Q₁ Q₃. _flea_ Q₂ Ff.

_wolvish_] _wolfish_ Theobald.

[2993] _thou ... thee._] Qq. Omitted in Ff.

[Exeunt....] Exeunt Lear, Kent, Gen. and Att. Capell. Exit. Qq. om. Ff.
Exit Lear and Attendants. Rowe (ed. 1). Ex. Lear and Attendants. Rowe
(ed. 2).

[2994] SCENE XVI. Pope.

_my lord_] Qq. om. Ff.

[2995] _To the ... master._] As in Ff. Capell ends the lines
_content ... ho!... master._ S. Walker would end them _content.-- ...
fool, ... master._

[2996] _you,--_] Theobald. _you_. Qq Ff.

[2997] _Pray ... more_] Ff. _Come sir, no more; you, more_ Q₁ Q₃. _Come
sir no more, you, more_ Q₂.

[2998] _content_] _be content_ Rowe.

[2999] [To the Fool] Johnson.

[3000] _Nuncle ... thee_] Two lines in Ff.

[3001] _take_] Ff. _and take_ Qq.

[3002] _with thee. A fox_] _with thee: A fox_ Ff. _with a fox_ Qq.

[3003] _buy_] _by_ F₂.

[3004] [Exit.] Ff. om. Qq.

[3005] _This ... unfitness_] Ff. Omitted in Qq.

[3006] _This ... knights!_] One line in Rowe. Two in Ff.

[3007] _'Tis_] _Is't_ Hanmer.

[3008] _At point_] Omitted by Pope.

[3009] _in mercy_] _at mercy_ Pope.

[3010] _too far_] om. Steevens (1793).

[3011] _taken_] _harm'd_ Pope.

[3012] _she_] F₁ F₂. _she'll_ F₃ F₄.

[3013] _unfitness,--_] _unfitness--_ Rowe. _unfitnesse._ Ff.

Re-enter Oswald.] Collier. Enter Steward. Ff. om. Qq.

[3014] _How now, Oswald! What_] Ff. Gon. _What Oswald, ho._ Oswald.
_Heere madam._ Gon. _What_ Qq.

[3015] _that_] Ff. _this_ Qq.

[3016] _Yes_] Qq. _I_ Ff. _Ay_ Rowe.

[3017] _and_] om. Pope.

[3018] _fear_] F₃ F₄. _feare_ F₁ F₂. _feares_ Q₁ Q₂. _fears_ Q₃.

[3019] _Get_] _So get_ Pope. _Go, get_ Jennens.

[3020] _And hasten ... lord_] _And hasten your returne: no, no, my
lord_ Ff. _and after your returne--now my lord_ Q₁ Q₃. _and after your
returne now my lord_ Q₂ (Cap. and Dev.) _& hasten your returne now my
lord_ Q₂ (Bodl. 1, 2. Mus. per. and imp.)

[Exit Oswald.] Exit Steward. Rowe. om. Qq Ff.

[3021] _milky_] Ff. _milkie_ Q₂ (Bodl. 1, 2. Mus. per. and imp.)
_mildie_ Q₁ Q₂ (Cap. and Dev.) Q₃.

_gentleness and_] _gentle, easy_ Jennens.

[3022] _condemn not_] Ff. _dislike not_ Qq. _condemn it not_ Pope.

_pardon_] _your pardon_ Jennens.

[3023] _You are_] F₂ F₃ F₄. _Your are_ F₁. _y'are_ Qq.

_attask'd for_] _attaskt for_ Q₂ (Bodl. 1, 2. Mus. per. and imp.)
_alapt_ Q₁ Q₂ (Cap. and Dev.) Q₃. _at task for_ F₁ F₃ F₄ _at taske for_
F₂. _taskt for_ Anon. conj. See note (VIII). _ajapt for_ Becket conj.
_attack'd for_ Collier conj.

[3024] _Than_] _By those who judge, than_ Seymour conj.

_praised_] _prais'd_ Ff. _praise_ Qq.

_harmful_] _harmless_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[3025] _How ... well._] Verse in Q₁ Ff Q₃. Prose in Q₂.

[3026] _better, oft_] Ff. _better ought,_ Qq.

[3027] _then--_] Q₁ Ff Q₃. _then._ Q₂.

[3028] _the event._] Q₁ Q₃. _the event,_ Q₂. _the 'vent._ Ff.

[Exeunt.] Q₂ Ff. Exit. Q₁ Q₃.

[3029] SCENE V.] SCENE XVII. Pope. SCENE IV. Eccles.

Court....] Capell. A court-yard belonging to the Duke of Albany's
Palace. Theobald.

Enter Lear, Kent, and Fool.] Q₁ Q₃. Enter Lear. Q₂. Enter Lear, Kent,
Gentleman, and Foole. Ff. Enter Lear, Kent, Gentlemen, and Fool.
Warburton.

[3030] Lear.] Lear [to a Gentleman. Jennens.

_letters._] _letters.--You with this to my daughter Regan._ [to Kent.
Jennens.

[3031] _afore_] Ff. _before_ Qq.

[3032] _brains_] _brain_ Pope.

_were_] _where_ Q₂.

_in's_] F₁. _ins_ F₂. _in his_ Qq F₃ F₄.

_were't_] Rowe. _wert_ Qq Ff.

[3033] _prithee_] _prethee_ Q₁ F₂ Q₃. _prethe_ Q. _prythee_ F₁ F₃ F₄.

_ne'er_] _nere_ Qq. _net_ Ff.

[3034] _she's_] F₁ F₃ F₄. _shees_ Q₂. _shes_ F₂. _she is_ Q₁ Q₃.

_crab's_] _crabbe is_ Q₁. _crab is_ Q₂. _crabb is_ Q₃.

[3035] _can tell what_] Ff. _con, what_ Qq.

[3036] _Why, ... thou_] Qq. _What can'st_ Ff.

[3037] _She will_] Ff. _Shee'l_ Q₁ _Sheel_ Q₂. _She'l_ Q₃.

_does_] _do's_ Ff. _doth_ Qq.

[3038] _Thou canst_] F₁ F₂. _Thou canst not_ Qq. _canst thou_ F₃ F₄.

_stands_] _stande_ Q₂.

_i' the_] _in the_ Qq.

[3039] _on's_] Ff. _of his_ Qq. _of one's_ Pope.

[3040] _one's_] _ones_ Ff. _his_ Qq.

_of_] Ff. _on_ Qq.

_side's_] Q₂ F₁ F₃ F₄. _sides_ F₂. _side his_ Q₁ Q₃. _side one's_ Pope.

[3041] _he_] _a_ Q₂.

[3042] _wrong--_] Theobald. _wrong._ Q₂ Ff. _wrong!_ Q₁ Q₃.

[3043] _shell?_] Ff. _shell._ Qq.

[3044] _put's_] _put his_ Qq.

_to his_] Q₂ Ff. _unto his_ Q₁ Q₃.

[3045] _daughters_] Ff. _daughter_ Qq.

[3046] _'em_] _them_ Qq.

[3047] _more_] Qq F₄. _mo_ F₁ F₂. _moe_ F₃.

[3048] _eight?_] Capell. _eight._ Qq Ff.

[3049] _indeed_] om. Qq.

[3050] _take 't_] _take it_ Capell.

_Monster_] Ff. _Monster,_ Qq.

[3051] _thou wert_] Qq F₁. _you wert_ F₂. _you were_ F₃ F₄.

[3052] _till_] _before_ Qq.

[3053] _O, let ... mad!_] Verse by Pope. Prose in Qq Ff.

[3054] _not mad_] Omitted in Qq.

_heaven!_] Ff. _heaven! I would not bee mad,_ Qq (_be_ Q₂).

[3055] Enter Gentleman.] Theobald. Omitted in Qq Ff.

[3056] _How now!_] Omitted in Qq.

[3057] Gent.] Ff. Servant. Qq.

[3058] [Exit. Qq. Exeunt Lear, and Gentleman. Capell.

[3059] _that's a_] _that is_ Qq.

[3060] _unless_] _except_ Qq.

[Exeunt.] Ff. Exit. Qq. To the Audience, as he goes out. Capell.




ACT II.


SCENE I. _The Earl of Gloucester's castle._

              _Enter_ EDMUND _and_ CURAN, _meeting_.[3061]

    _Edm._ Save thee, Curan.[3062]

    _Cur._ And you, sir. I have been with your father, and[3063][3064]
    given him notice that the Duke of Cornwall and Regan his[3063][3065]
    duchess will be here with him this night.[3063][3066]

    _Edm._ How comes that?[3062]                                       5

    _Cur._ Nay, I know not. You have heard of the news
    abroad, I mean the whispered ones, for they are yet but[3067]
    ear-kissing arguments?[3068]

    _Edm._ Not I: pray you, what are they?[3069]

    _Cur._ Have you heard of no likely wars toward, 'twixt[3070][3071][3072]  10
    the Dukes of Cornwall and Albany?[3070][3071][3073]

    _Edm._ Not a word.[3070]

    _Cur._ You may do then in time. Fare you well, sir.   [_Exit._[3074]

    _Edm._ The duke be here to-night? The better! best![3075][3076][3077]
    This weaves itself perforce into my business.[3076]               15
    My father hath set guard to take my brother;[3076]
    And I have one thing, of a queasy question,[3076][3078]
    Which I must act: briefness and fortune, work![3076][3079]
    Brother, a word; descend: brother, I say![3076]

                          _Enter_ EDGAR.[3080]

    My father watches: O sir, fly this place;[3076][3081]             20
    Intelligence is given where you are hid;[3076]
    You have now the good advantage of the night:[3076][3082]
    Have you not spoken 'gainst the Duke of Cornwall?[3076][3083]
    He's coming hither, now, i' the night, i' the haste,[3076][3084]
    And Regan with him: have you nothing said[3076]                   25
    Upon his party 'gainst the Duke of Albany?[3076][3085]
    Advise yourself.[3076][3086]

    _Edg._           I am sure on't, not a word.[3076]

    _Edm._ I hear my father coming: pardon me:[3076][3087]
    In cunning I must draw my sword upon you:[3076][3087]
    Draw: seem to defend yourself: now quit you well.[3076][3088]     30
    Yield: come before my father. Light, ho, here![3076][3089]
    Fly, brother. Torches, torches! So farewell.

                                             [_Exit Edgar._[3076][3090]

    Some blood drawn on me would beget opinion

                                         [_Wounds his arm._[3076][3091]

    Of my more fierce endeavour: I have seen drunkards[3076][3092]
    Do more than this in sport. Father, father![3076][3093]           35
    Stop, stop! No help?[3076]

        _Enter_ GLOUCESTER, _and_ Servants _with torches_.[3094]

    _Glou._ Now, Edmund, where's the villain?[3076][3095]

    _Edm._ Here stood he in the dark, his sharp sword out,[3076]
    Mumbling of wicked charms, conjuring the moon[3076][3096]
    To stand 's auspicious mistress.[3076]

    _Glou._                          But where is he?[3076]           40

    _Edm._ Look, sir, I bleed.[3076]

    _Glou._                    Where is the villain, Edmund?[3076][3097]

    _Edm._ Fled this way, sir. When by no means he could--[3076][3098]

    _Glou._ Pursue him, ho!--Go after.  [_Exeunt some
        Servants._]  'By no means' what?[3076][3099]

    _Edm._ Persuade me to the murder of your lordship;[3076]
    But that I told him the revenging gods[3076][3100]                45
    'Gainst parricides did all their thunders bend,[3076][3101]
    Spoke with how manifold and strong a bond[3076]
    The child was bound to the father; sir, in fine,[3076][3102]
    Seeing how loathly opposite I stood[3076]
    To his unnatural purpose, in fell motion[3076][3103]              50
    With his prepared sword he charges home[3076]
    My unprovided body, lanced mine arm:[3076][3104]
    But when he saw my best alarum'd spirits[3076][3105]
    Bold in the quarrel's right, roused to the encounter,[3076][3106]
    Or whether gasted by the noise I made,[3076][3107]                55
    Full suddenly he fled.[3076][3108]

    _Glou._                Let him fly far:[3076]
    Not in this land shall he remain uncaught;[3076]
    And found--dispatch. The noble duke my master,[3076][3109]
    My worthy arch and patron, comes to-night:[3076][3110]
    By his authority I will proclaim it,[3076]                        60
    That he which finds him shall deserve our thanks,[3076][3111]
    Bringing the murderous caitiff to the stake;[3076][3112]
    He that conceals him, death.[3076][3113]

    _Edm._ When I dissuaded him from his intent[3076]
    And found him pight to do it, with curst speech[3076]             65
    I threaten'd to discover him: he replied,[3076]
    'Thou unpossessing bastard! dost thou think,[3076]
    If I would stand against thee, could the reposure[3076][3114][3115]
    Of any trust, virtue, or worth, in thee[3076][3114]
    Make thy words faith'd? No: what I should deny--[3076][3114][3116]  70
    As this I would; ay, though thou didst produce[3076][3117]
    My very character--I'ld turn it all[3076][3118]
    To thy suggestion, plot, and damned practice:[3076][3119]
    And thou must make a dullard of the world,[3076][3120]
    If they not thought the profits of my death[3076]                 75
    Were very pregnant and potential spurs[3076][3121]
    To make thee seek it.'[3076]

    _Glou._                Strong and fasten'd villain![3076][3122]
    Would he deny his letter? I never got him.[3076][3123]

                                                       [_Tucket within._

    Hark, the duke's trumpets! I know not why he comes.[3076][3124]
    All ports I'll bar; the villain shall not 'scape;[3076]           80
    The duke must grant me that: besides, his picture[3076]
    I will send far and near, that all the kingdom[3076]
    May have due note of him; and of my land,[3076][3125]
    Loyal and natural boy, I'll work the means[3076]
    To make thee capable.[3076]                                       85

            _Enter_ CORNWALL, REGAN, _and_ Attendants.[3126]

    _Corn._ How now, my noble friend! since I came hither,[3076][3127]
    Which I can call but now, I have heard strange news.[3076][3128]

    _Reg._ If it be true, all vengeance comes too short[3076]
    Which can pursue the offender. How dost, my lord?[3076][3129]

    _Glou._ O, madam, my old heart is crack'd, is crack'd![3076][3130]  90

    _Reg._ What, did my father's godson seek your life?[3076]
    He whom my father named? your Edgar?[3076][3131]

    _Glou._ O, lady, lady, shame would have it hid![3076][3132]

    _Reg._ Was he not companion with the riotous knights[3076][3133]
    That tend upon my father?[3076][3134]                             95

    _Glou._ I know not, madam: 'tis too bad, too bad.[3076][3135]

    _Edm._ Yes, madam, he was of that consort.[3076][3136]

    _Reg._ No marvel then, though he were ill affected:
    'Tis they have put him on the old man's death,
    To have the waste and spoil of his revenues.[3137]               100
    I have this present evening from my sister
    Been well inform'd of them, and with such cautions
    That if they come to sojourn at my house,[3138]
    I'll not be there.[3138]

    _Corn._            Nor I, assure thee, Regan.[3139][3140]
    Edmund, I hear that you have shown your father[3139][3141]       105
    A child-like office.[3139]

    _Edm._               'Twas my duty, sir.[3142]

    _Glou._ He did bewray his practice, and received[3143]
    This hurt you see, striving to apprehend him.

    _Corn._ Is he pursued?

    _Glou._                Ay, my good lord.[3144]

    _Corn._ If he be taken, he shall never more[3145]                110
    Be fear'd of doing harm: make your own purpose,[3145]
    How in my strength you please. For you, Edmund,[3145][3146]
    Whose virtue and obedience doth this instant[3145][3147]
    So much commend itself, you shall be ours:[3145][3148]
    Natures of such deep trust we shall much need:[3145][3149]       115
    You we first seize on.[3145][3149]

    _Edm._                 I shall serve you, sir,[3150][3151]
    Truly, however else.[3150]

    _Glou._              For him I thank your grace.[3152]

    _Corn._ You know not why we came to visit you,--[3153]

    _Reg._ Thus out of season, threading dark-eyed night:[3154]
    Occasions, noble Gloucester, of some poise,[3155]                120
    Wherein we must have use of your advice:[3156]
    Our father he hath writ, so hath our sister,
    Of differences, which I least thought it fit[3157]
    To answer from our home; the several messengers[3158]
    From hence attend dispatch. Our good old friend,                 125
    Lay comforts to your bosom and bestow[3159]
    Your needful counsel to our business,[3159][3160]
    Which craves the instant use.[3159][3161]

    _Glou._                       I serve you, madam:[3162]
    Your graces are right welcome.      [_Flourish. Exeunt._[3162][3163]


SCENE II. _Before Gloucester's castle._

             _Enter_ KENT _and_ OSWALD, _severally_.[3164]

    _Osw._ Good dawning to thee, friend: art of this house?[3165][3166]

    _Kent._ Ay.

    _Osw._ Where may we set our horses?

    _Kent._ I' the mire.[3167]

    _Osw._ Prithee, if thou lovest me, tell me.[3168]                  5

    _Kent._ I love thee not.

    _Osw._ Why then I care not for thee.

    _Kent._ If I had thee in Lipsbury pinfold, I would make[3169]
    thee care for me.

    _Osw._ Why dost thou use me thus? I know thee not.                10

    _Kent._ Fellow, I know thee.

    _Osw._ What dost thou know me for?

    _Kent._ A knave; a rascal; an eater of broken meats; a
    base, proud, shallow, beggarly, three-suited, hundred-pound,[3170]
    filthy, worsted-stocking knave; a lily-livered, action-taking[3171]  15
    knave; a whoreson, glass-gazing, superserviceable, finical[3172]
    rogue; one-trunk-inheriting slave; one that wouldst be a[3173]
    bawd in way of good service, and art nothing but the composition
    of a knave, beggar, coward, pandar, and the son
    and heir of a mongrel bitch: one whom I will beat into[3174]      20
    clamorous whining, if thou deniest the least syllable of thy[3175]
    addition.

    _Osw._ Why, what a monstrous fellow art thou, thus to[3176]
    rail on one that is neither known of thee nor knows thee![3177]

    _Kent._ What a brazen-faced varlet art thou, to deny              25
    thou knowest me! Is it two days ago since I tripped up[3178][3179]
    thy heels and beat thee before the king? Draw, you rogue:[3179]
    for, though it be night, yet the moon shines; I'll make a[3180]
    sop o' the moonshine of you: draw, you whoreson cullionly[3181]
    barber-monger, draw.                 [_Drawing his sword._[3182]  30

    _Osw._ Away! I have nothing to do with thee.

    _Kent._ Draw, you rascal: you come with letters against[3183]
    the king, and take vanity the puppet's part against the
    royalty of her father: draw, you rogue, or I'll so carbonado[3184]
    your shanks: draw, you rascal; come your ways.[3185]              35

    _Osw._ Help, ho! murder! help!

    _Kent._ Strike, you slave; stand, rogue; stand, you neat[3186]
    slave, strike.                                 [_Beating him._[3187]

    _Osw._ Help, ho! murder! murder!

       _Enter_ EDMUND, _with his rapier drawn_, CORNWALL, REGAN,
                   GLOUCESTER, _and_ Servants.[3188]

    _Edm._ How now! What's the matter? [_Parting them._[3189][3190][3191]  40

    _Kent._ With you, goodman boy, an you please: come,[3192]
    I'll flesh you; come on, young master.[3193]

    _Glou._ Weapons! arms! What's the matter here?[3194]

    _Corn._ Keep peace, upon your lives;[3195]
    He dies that strikes again. What is the matter?[3195][3196]       45

    _Reg._ The messengers from our sister and the king.[3197]

    _Corn._ What is your difference? speak.[3198]

    _Osw._ I am scarce in breath, my lord.

    _Kent._ No marvel, you have so bestirred your valour.[3199]
    You cowardly rascal, nature disclaims in thee: a tailor made[3199][3200]  50
    thee.[3199]

    _Corn._ Thou art a strange fellow: a tailor make a man?[3199][3201]

    _Kent._ Ay, a tailor, sir: a stone-cutter or a painter[3202]
    could not have made him so ill, though he had been but[3203]
    two hours at the trade.[3204]                                     55

    _Corn._ Speak yet, how grew your quarrel?[3205]

    _Osw._ This ancient ruffian, sir, whose life I have spared[3206]
    at suit of his gray beard,--[3207]

    _Kent._ Thou whoreson zed! thou unnecessary letter![3208]
    My lord, if you will give me leave, I will tread this[3209]       60
    unbolted villain into mortar, and daub the walls of a jakes[3210]
    with him. Spare my gray beard, you wagtail?[3211]

    _Corn._ Peace, sirrah![3212][3213]
    You beastly knave, know you no reverence?[3212][3214]

    _Kent._ Yes, sir; but anger hath a privilege.[3215]               65

    _Corn._ Why art thou angry?

    _Kent._ That such a slave as this should wear a sword,
    Who wears no honesty. Such smiling rogues as these,[3216]
    Like rats, oft bite the holy cords a-twain[3217]
    Which are too intrinse to unloose; smooth every passion[3218]     70
    That in the natures of their lords rebel;[3219]
    Bring oil to fire, snow to their colder moods;[3220]
    Renege, affirm, and turn their halcyon beaks[3221]
    With every gale and vary of their masters,[3222]
    Knowing nought, like dogs, but following.[3223][3224]             75
    A plague upon your epileptic visage![3223]
    Smile you my speeches, as I were a fool?[3223][3225]
    Goose, if I had you upon Sarum plain,[3226]
    I'ld drive ye cackling home to Camelot.[3227]

    _Corn._ What, art thou mad, old fellow?[3228]                     80

    _Glou._ How fell you out? say that.[3228][3229]

    _Kent._ No contraries hold more antipathy
    Than I and such a knave.

    _Corn._ Why dost thou call him knave? What is his fault?[3230]

    _Kent._ His countenance likes me not.                             85

    _Corn._ No more perchance does mine, nor his, nor hers.[3231]

    _Kent._ Sir, 'tis my occupation to be plain:
    I have seen better faces in my time
    Than stands on any shoulders that I see[3232]
    Before me at this instant.

    _Corn._                    This is some fellow,[3233][3234]       90
    Who, having been praised for bluntness, doth affect[3233]
    A saucy roughness, and constrains the garb[3233][3235]
    Quite from his nature: he cannot flatter, he,--[3233][3236]
    An honest mind and plain,--he must speak truth![3233][3237]
    An they will take it, so; if not, he's plain.[3233][3238]         95
    These kind of knaves I know, which in this plainness[3233][3239]
    Harbour more craft and more corrupter ends[3233][3240]
    Than twenty silly ducking observants[3233][3241]
    That stretch their duties nicely.[3233]

    _Kent._ Sir, in good faith, in sincere verity,[3242]             100
    Under the allowance of your great aspect,[3243]
    Whose influence, like the wreath of radiant fire
    On flickering Phœbus' front,--

    _Corn._                           What mean'st by this?[3244]

    _Kent._ To go out of my dialect, which you discommend[3245]
    so much. I know, sir, I am no flatterer: he that beguiled[3246]  105
    you in a plain accent was a plain knave; which, for my
    part, I will not be, though I should win your displeasure to[3247]
    entreat me to't.[3247][3248]

    _Corn._ What was the offence you gave him?[3249]

    _Osw._ I never gave him any:[3250][3251]                         110
    It pleased the king his master very late[3251][3252]
    To strike at me, upon his misconstruction;[3251][3253]
    When he, conjunct, and flattering his displeasure,[3254]
    Tripp'd me behind; being down, insulted, rail'd,
    And put upon him such a deal of man,[3255]                       115
    That worthied him, got praises of the king[3255]
    For him attempting who was self-subdued;
    And in the fleshment of this dread exploit[3256]
    Drew on me here again.[3257]

    _Kent._                None of these rogues and cowards[3258]
    But Ajax is their fool.[3258][3259]

    _Corn._                 Fetch forth the stocks!                  120
    You stubborn ancient knave, you reverend braggart,[3260]
    We'll teach you--[3261]

    _Kent._           Sir, I am too old to learn:[3262]
    Call not your stocks for me: I serve the king,[3262]
    On whose employment I was sent to you:[3262][3263]
    You shall do small respect, show too bold malice[3264]           125
    Against the grace and person of my master,
    Stocking his messenger.[3265]

    _Corn._ Fetch forth the stocks! As I have life and honour,[3266][3267]
    There shall he sit till noon.[3266]

    _Reg._ Till noon! till night, my lord, and all night too.[3268]  130

    _Kent._ Why, madam, if I were your father's dog,[3269]
    You should not use me so.[3269][3270]

    _Reg._                    Sir, being his knave, I will.

    _Corn._ This is a fellow of the self-same colour[3271]
    Our sister speaks of. Come, bring away the stocks!

                                           [_Stocks brought out._[3272]

    _Glou._ Let me beseech your grace not to do so:                  135
    His fault is much, and the good king his master[3273]
    Will check him for't: your purposed low correction[3273]
    Is such as basest and contemned'st wretches[3273][3274]
    For pilferings and most common trespasses[3273]
    Are punish'd with: the king must take it ill,[3273]              140
    That he, so slightly valued in his messenger,[3273][3275]
    Should have him thus restrain'd.[3273][3275]

    _Corn._                          I'll answer that.

    _Reg._ My sister may receive it much more worse,[3276]
    To have her gentleman abused, assaulted,[3277]
    For following her affairs. Put in his legs.[3278]                145

                                     [_Kent is put in the stocks._[3279]

    Come, my good lord, away.                [_Exeunt all but Gloucester
                                                        and Kent._[3280]

    _Glou._ I am sorry for thee, friend; 'tis the duke's pleasure,[3281]
    Whose disposition, all the world well knows,
    Will not be rubb'd nor stopp'd: I'll entreat for thee.[3282]

    _Kent._ Pray, do not, sir: I have watch'd and travell'd
              hard;[3283]                                            150
    Some time I shall sleep out, the rest I'll whistle.[3284]
    A good man's fortune may grow out at heels:
    Give you good morrow!

    _Glou._ The duke's to blame in this; 'twill be ill taken.

                                                          [_Exit._[3285]

    _Kent._ Good king, that must approve the common saw,             155
    Thou out of heaven's benediction comest[3286]
    To the warm sun!
    Approach, thou beacon to this under globe,[3287][3288]
    That by thy comfortable beams I may[3287]
    Peruse this letter! Nothing almost sees miracles[3287][3289]     160
    But misery: I know 'tis from Cordelia,[3287][3290]
    Who hath most fortunately been inform'd[3287][3291]
    Of my obscured course; and shall find time[3287][3292][3293]
    From this enormous state, seeking to give[3287][3293][3294]
    Losses their remedies. All weary and o'er-watch'd,[3287][3295]   165
    Take vantage, heavy eyes, not to behold[3296]
    This shameful lodging.[3297]
    Fortune, good night: smile once more; turn thy wheel![3297]

                                                        [_Sleeps._[3298]


SCENE III. _A wood._

                          _Enter_ EDGAR.[3299]

    _Edg._ I heard myself proclaim'd;[3300]
    And by the happy hollow of a tree
    Escaped the hunt. No port is free; no place,
    That guard and most unusual vigilance[3301]
    Does not attend my taking. Whiles I may 'scape[3302]               5
    I will preserve myself: and am bethought
    To take the basest and most poorest shape[3303]
    That ever penury in contempt of man
    Brought near to beast: my face I'll grime with filth,
    Blanket my loins, elf all my hair in knots,[3304]                 10
    And with presented nakedness out-face
    The winds and persecutions of the sky.[3305]
    The country gives me proof and precedent[3306]
    Of Bedlam beggars, who with roaring voices
    Strike in their numb'd and mortified bare arms[3307]              15
    Pins, wooden pricks, nails, sprigs of rosemary;[3308]
    And with this horrible object, from low farms,[3309]
    Poor pelting villages, sheep-cotes and mills,[3310]
    Sometime with lunatic bans, sometime with prayers,[3311]
    Enforce their charity. Poor Turlygod! poor Tom![3312]             20
    That's something yet: Edgar I nothing am.                   [_Exit._


SCENE IV. _Before Gloucester's castle. Kent in the stocks._

               _Enter_ LEAR, Fool, _and_ Gentleman.[3313]

    _Lear._ 'Tis strange that they should so depart from home,[3314]
    And not send back my messenger.[3315]

    _Gent._                         As I learn'd,[3316]
    The night before there was no purpose in them[3316][3317]
    Of this remove.[3316][3318]

    _Kent._         Hail to thee, noble master!

    _Lear._ Ha![3319][3320]                                            5
    Makest thou this shame thy pastime?[3320]

    _Kent._                             No, my lord.[3321]

    _Fool._ Ha, ha! he wears cruel garters. Horses are tied[3322][3323]
    by the heads, dogs and bears by the neck, monkeys by the[3322][3324]
    loins, and men by the legs: when a man's over-lusty at[3322][3325]
    legs, then he wears wooden nether-stocks.[3322][3326]             10

    _Lear._ What's he that hath so much thy place mistook[3327]
    To set thee here?[3327]

    _Kent._           It is both he and she;[3328]
    Your son and daughter.[3328]

    _Lear._ No.

    _Kent._ Yes.                                                      15

    _Lear._ No, I say.

    _Kent._ I say, yea.[3329]

    _Lear._ No, no, they would not.[3330]

    _Kent._ Yes, they have.[3330]

    _Lear._ By Jupiter, I swear, no.                                  20

    _Kent._ By Juno, I swear, ay.[3331]

    _Lear._                       They durst not do't;[3332]
    They could not, would not do't; 'tis worse than murder,[3332][3333]
    To do upon respect such violent outrage:
    Resolve me with all modest haste which way
    Thou mightst deserve, or they impose, this usage,[3334]           25
    Coming from us.

    _Kent._         My lord, when at their home
    I did commend your highness' letters to them,
    Ere I was risen from the place that show'd[3335]
    My duty kneeling, came there a reeking post,[3336]
    Stew'd in his haste, half breathless, panting forth[3337]         30
    From Goneril his mistress salutations;[3338]
    Deliver'd letters, spite of intermission,[3339]
    Which presently they read: on whose contents[3340]
    They summon'd up their meiny, straight took horse;[3341]
    Commanded me to follow and attend                                 35
    The leisure of their answer; gave me cold looks:
    And meeting here the other messenger,[3342]
    Whose welcome, I perceived, had poison'd mine--
    Being the very fellow that of late[3343]
    Display'd so saucily against your highness--                      40
    Having more man than wit about me, drew:[3344]
    He raised the house with loud and coward cries.
    Your son and daughter found this trespass worth
    The shame which here it suffers.[3345]

    _Fool._ Winter's not gone yet, if the wild geese fly that
        way.[3346][3347]                                              45
                Fathers that wear rags[3346][3348]
                  Do make their children blind;[3346][3348]
                But fathers that bear bags[3346][3348]
                  Shall see their children kind.[3346][3348]
                Fortune, that arrant whore,[3346][3348]               50
                Ne'er turns the key to the poor.[3346][3348]
    But, for all this, thou shalt have as many dolours for thy[3346][3349][3350]
    daughters as thou canst tell in a year.[3346][3349]

    _Lear._ O, how this mother swells up toward my heart!
    Hysterica passio, down, thou climbing sorrow,[3351]               55
    Thy element's below! Where is this daughter?

    _Kent._ With the earl, sir, here within.[3352][3353]

    _Lear._ Follow me not; stay here.               [_Exit._[3352][3354]

    _Gent._ Made you no more offence but what you speak of?[3355]

    _Kent._ None.[3356][3357]                                         60
    How chance the king comes with so small a train?[3357][3358]

    _Fool._ An thou hadst been set i' the stocks for that[3359][3360]
    question, thou hadst well deserved it.[3361]

    _Kent._ Why, fool?

    _Fool._ We'll set thee to school to an ant, to teach thee         65
    there's no labouring i' the winter. All that follow their[3360][3362]
    noses are led by their eyes but blind men; and there's not[3362]
    a nose among twenty but can smell him that's stinking. Let[3363]
    go thy hold when a great wheel runs down a hill, lest it
    break thy neck with following it; but the great one that[3364]    70
    goes up the hill, let him draw thee after. When a wise man[3365]
    gives thee better counsel, give me mine again: I would have
    none but knaves follow it, since a fool gives it.
            That sir which serves and seeks for gain,[3366][3367]
              And follows but for form,[3367]                         75
            Will pack when it begins to rain,[3367][3368]
              And leave thee in the storm.[3367][3369]
            But I will tarry; the fool will stay,[3367][3370]
              And let the wise man fly:[3367][3371]
            The knave turns fool that runs away;[3367][3372]          80
              The fool no knave, perdy.[3367][3372]

    _Kent._ Where learned you this, fool?

    _Fool._ Not i' the stocks, fool.[3360][3373]

               _Re-enter_ LEAR, _with_ GLOUCESTER.[3374]

    _Lear._ Deny to speak with me? They are sick? they are weary?[3375]
    They have travell'd all the night? Mere fetches;[3376][3377]      85
    The images of revolt and flying off.[3377][3378]
    Fetch me a better answer.[3379]

    _Glou._                   My dear lord,[3380]
    You know the fiery quality of the duke;[3380]
    How unremoveable and fix'd he is[3380]
    In his own course.[3380]                                          90

    _Lear._ Vengeance! plague! death! confusion![3380][3381]
    Fiery? what quality? Why, Gloucester, Gloucester,[3380][3382]
    I'ld speak with the Duke of Cornwall and his wife.[3380]

    _Glou._ Well, my good lord, I have inform'd them so.[3383]

    _Lear._ Inform'd them! Dost thou understand me, man?[3383]        95

    _Glou._ Ay, my good lord.

    _Lear._ The king would speak with Cornwall; the dear father[3384]
    Would with his daughter speak, commands her service:[3385]
    Are they inform'd of this? My breath and blood![3386]
    'Fiery'? 'the fiery duke'? Tell the hot duke that--[3387]        100
    No, but not yet: may be he is not well:[3388]
    Infirmity doth still neglect all office[3389]
    Whereto our health is bound; we are not ourselves[3389][3390]
    When nature being oppress'd commands the mind[3389][3391]
    To suffer with the body: I'll forbear;[3389]                     105
    And am fall'n out with my more headier will,[3392]
    To take the indisposed and sickly fit[3393]
    For the sound man.  [_Looking on Kent_]  Death on my
              state! wherefore[3393][3394]
    Should he sit here? This act persuades me[3393][3395]
    That this remotion of the duke and her[3393]                     110
    Is practice only. Give me my servant forth.[3396]
    Go tell the duke and's wife I'ld speak with them,[3397]
    Now, presently: bid them come forth and hear me,
    Or at their chamber-door I'll beat the drum
    Till it cry sleep to death.[3398]                                115

    _Glou._ I would have all well betwixt you.            [_Exit._[3399]

    _Lear._ O me, my heart, my rising heart! But down![3400]

    _Fool._ Cry to it, nuncle, as the cockney did to the eels[3401]
    when she put 'em i' the paste alive; she knapped 'em o' the[3402]
    coxcombs with a stick, and cried 'Down, wantons, down!'          120
    'Twas her brother that, in pure kindness to his horse, buttered[3403]
    his hay.

  _Re-enter_ GLOUCESTER, _with_ CORNWALL, REGAN, _and_ Servants.[3404]

    _Lear._ Good morrow to you both.

    _Corn._                               Hail to your grace!

                                        [_Kent is set at liberty._[3405]

    _Reg._ I am glad to see your highness.

    _Lear._ Regan, I think you are; I know what reason[3406]         125
    I have to think so: if thou shouldst not be glad,[3407]
    I would divorce me from thy mother's tomb,[3408]
    Sepulchring an adultress. [_To Kent_] O, are you free?[3409]
    Some other time for that. Beloved Regan,
    Thy sister's naught: O Regan, she hath tied[3410][3411]          130
    Sharp-tooth'd unkindness, like a vulture, here:[3410]

                                           [_Points to his heart._[3412]

    I can scarce speak to thee; thou'lt not believe[3413]
    With how depraved a quality--O Regan![3414]

    _Reg._ I pray you, sir, take patience: I have hope[3415]
    You less know how to value her desert                            135
    Than she to scant her duty.[3416]

    _Lear._                     Say, how is that?[3417][3418]

    _Reg._ I cannot think my sister in the least[3417]
    Would fail her obligation: if, sir, perchance[3417][3419]
    She have restrain'd the riots of your followers,[3417]
    'Tis on such ground and to such wholesome end[3417]              140
    As clears her from all blame.[3417]

    _Lear._ My curses on her!

    _Reg._                    O, sir, you are old;
    Nature in you stands on the very verge[3420][3421]
    Of her confine: you should be ruled and led[3420][3422]
    By some discretion that discerns your state[3420]                145
    Better than you yourself. Therefore I pray you[3420][3423]
    That to our sister you do make return;[3420]
    Say you have wrong'd her, sir.

    _Lear._                        Ask her forgiveness?[3424]
    Do you but mark how this becomes the house:[3425]
    [Kneeling] 'Dear daughter, I confess that I am old;[3426]        150
    Age is unnecessary: on my knees I beg
    That you'll vouchsafe me raiment, bed and food.'

    _Reg._ Good sir, no more; these are unsightly tricks:
    Return you to my sister.

    _Lear._       [_Rising_] Never, Regan:[3427]
    She hath abated me of half my train;                             155
    Look'd black upon me; struck me with her tongue,[3428]
    Most serpent-like, upon the very heart:
    All the stored vengeances of heaven fall[3429]
    On her ingrateful top! Strike her young bones,[3429][3430]
    You taking airs, with lameness.[3429]

    _Corn._                         Fie, sir, fie![3431]             160

    _Lear._ You nimble lightnings, dart your blinding flames[3432]
    Into her scornful eyes. Infect her beauty,
    You fen-suck'd fogs, drawn by the powerful sun[3433]
    To fall and blast her pride.[3433][3434]

    _Reg._ O the blest gods! so will you wish on me,[3435]           165
    When the rash mood is on.[3435][3436]

    _Lear._ No, Regan, thou shalt never have my curse:
    Thy tender-hefted nature shall not give[3437][3438]
    Thee o'er to harshness: her eyes are fierce, but thine[3438][3439]
    Do comfort and not burn. 'Tis not in thee[3438]                  170
    To grudge my pleasures, to cut off my train,[3438]
    To bandy hasty words, to scant my sizes,
    And in conclusion to oppose the bolt
    Against my coming in: thou better know'st[3440]
    The offices of nature, bond of childhood,                        175
    Effects of courtesy, dues of gratitude;[3441]
    Thy half o' the kingdom hast thou not forgot,[3442]
    Wherein I thee endow'd.

    _Reg._                  Good sir, to the purpose.[3443]

    _Lear._ Who put my man i' the stocks?        [_Tucket within._[3444]

    _Corn._                               What trumpet's that?

    _Reg._ I know't; my sister's: this approves her letter,[3445]    180
    That she would soon be here.

                         _Enter_ OSWALD.[3446]

                                 Is your lady come?

    _Lear._ This is a slave whose easy-borrow'd pride[3447]
    Dwells in the fickle grace of her he follows.[3448]
    Out, varlet, from my sight!

    _Corn._                     What means your grace?

    _Lear._ Who stock'd my servant? Regan, I have good hope[3449]    185
    Thou didst not know on't. Who comes here?

                         _Enter_ GONERIL.[3450]

                                              O heavens,
    If you do love old men, if your sweet sway[3451][3452]
    Allow obedience, if yourselves are old,[3451][3453]
    Make it your cause; send down, and take my part![3451]
    [_To Gon._] Art not ashamed to look upon this beard?[3454]       190
    O Regan, wilt thou take her by the hand?[3455]

    _Gon._ Why not by the hand, sir? How have I offended?
    All's not offence that indiscretion finds[3456]
    And dotage terms so.

    _Lear._              O sides, you are too tough;
    Will you yet hold? How came my man i' the stocks?[3457]          195

    _Corn._ I set him there, sir: but his own disorders[3458]
    Deserved much less advancement.[3459]

    _Lear._                         You! did you?

    _Reg._ I pray you, father, being weak, seem so.[3460]
    If, till the expiration of your month,[3461]
    You will return and sojourn with my sister,                      200
    Dismissing half your train, come then to me:
    I am now from home and out of that provision[3462]
    Which shall be needful for your entertainment.

    _Lear._ Return to her, and fifty men dismiss'd?
    No, rather I abjure all roofs, and choose                        205
    To wage against the enmity o' the air,[3463][3464]
    To be a comrade with the wolf and owl,--[3463][3465]
    Necessity's sharp pinch! Return with her?
    Why, the hot-blooded France, that dowerless took[3466][3467]
    Our youngest born, I could as well be brought[3467]              210
    To knee his throne, and, squire-like, pension beg[3468]
    To keep base life afoot. Return with her?
    Persuade me rather to be slave and sumpter
    To this detested groom.                 [_Pointing at Oswald._[3469]

    _Gon._                  At your choice, sir.

    _Lear._ I prithee, daughter, do not make me mad:[3470]           215
    I will not trouble thee, my child; farewell:
    We'll no more meet, no more see one another:
    But yet thou art my flesh, my blood, my daughter;
    Or rather a disease that's in my flesh,[3471]
    Which I must needs call mine: thou art a boil,[3472]             220
    A plague-sore, an embossed carbuncle,[3473][3474]
    In my corrupted blood. But I'll not chide thee;[3473]
    Let shame come when it will, I do not call it:[3475]
    I do not bid the thunder-bearer shoot,[3476]
    Nor tell tales of thee to high-judging Jove:[3477]               225
    Mend when thou canst; be better at thy leisure:
    I can be patient; I can stay with Regan,
    I and my hundred knights.

    _Reg._                       Not altogether so:[3478][3479]
    I look'd not for you yet, nor am provided[3478][3480]
    For your fit welcome. Give ear, sir, to my sister;[3478][3481]   230
    For those that mingle reason with your passion[3478][3482]
    Must be content to think you old, and so--[3483]
    But she knows what she does.

    _Lear._                      Is this well spoken?[3484]

    _Reg._ I dare avouch it, sir: what, fifty followers?[3485]
    Is it not well? What should you need of more?                    235
    Yea, or so many, sith that both charge and danger[3486]
    Speak 'gainst so great a number? How in one house[3487]
    Should many people under two commands
    Hold amity? 'Tis hard, almost impossible.[3488]

    _Gon._ Why might not you, my lord, receive attendance            240
    From those that she calls servants or from mine?

    _Reg._ Why not, my lord? If then they chanced to slack you,[3489]
    We could control them. If you will come to me,[3490]
    For now I spy a danger, I entreat you[3491]
    To bring but five and twenty: to no more[3492]                   245
    Will I give place or notice.

    _Lear._ I gave you all--[3493]

    _Reg._                   And in good time you gave it.

    _Lear._ Made you my guardians, my depositaries,
    But kept a reservation to be follow'd[3494]
    With such a number. What, must I come to you[3495]               250
    With five and twenty, Regan? said you so?[3496]

    _Reg._ And speak't again, my lord; no more with me.[3497]

    _Lear._ Those wicked creatures yet do look well-favour'd,[3498][3499]
    When others are more wicked; not being the worst[3498][3500]
    Stands in some rank of praise. [_To Gon._] I'll go with
              thee:[3501]                                            255
    Thy fifty yet doth double five and twenty,
    And thou art twice her love.[3502]

    _Gon._                       Hear me, my lord:
    What need you five and twenty, ten, or five,
    To follow in a house where twice so many
    Have a command to tend you?

    _Reg._                      What need one?[3503]                 260

    _Lear._ O, reason not the need: our basest beggars[3504]
    Are in the poorest thing superfluous:
    Allow not nature more than nature needs,
    Man's life's as cheap as beast's: thou art a lady;[3505]
    If only to go warm were gorgeous,                                265
    Why, nature needs not what thou gorgeous wear'st,[3506]
    Which scarcely keeps thee warm. But for true need,--[3507]
    You heavens, give me that patience, patience I need![3508]
    You see me here, you gods, a poor old man,[3509]
    As full of grief as age; wretched in both:                       270
    If it be you that stirs these daughters' hearts[3510]
    Against their father, fool me not so much[3511]
    To bear it tamely; touch me with noble anger,[3512]
    And let not women's weapons, water-drops,[3513]
    Stain my man's cheeks! No, you unnatural hags,                   275
    I will have such revenges on you both[3514]
    That all the world shall--I will do such things,--[3515]
    What they are, yet I know not, but they shall be
    The terrors of the earth. You think I'll weep;[3516]
    No, I'll not weep:[3517]                                         280
    I have full cause of weeping; but this heart[3517][3518]
    Shall break into a hundred thousand flaws,[3517][3519]
    Or ere I'll weep. O fool, I shall go mad!

                      [_Exeunt Lear, Gloucester, Kent, and Fool._[3520]

    _Corn._ Let us withdraw; 'twill be a storm.

                                      [_Storm and tempest._[3521][3522]

    _Reg._ This house is little: the old man and his people[3522][3523]  285
    Cannot be well bestow'd.[3522][3524]

    _Gon._ 'Tis his own blame; hath put himself from rest,[3522][3525]
    And must needs taste his folly.[3522][3526]

    _Reg._ For his particular, I'll receive him gladly,
    But not one follower.

    _Gon._                So am I purposed.[3527][3528]              290
    Where is my lord of Gloucester?[3528]

    _Corn._ Follow'd the old man forth: he is return'd.[3529]

                         _Re-enter_ GLOUCESTER.

    _Glou._ The king is in high rage.

    _Corn._                           Whither is he going?[3530][3531]

    _Glou._ He calls to horse; but will I know not whither.[3530][3532]

    _Corn._ 'Tis best to give him way; he leads himself.[3533]       295

    _Gon._ My lord, entreat him by no means to stay.

    _Glou._ Alack, the night comes on, and the bleak winds[3534]
    Do sorely ruffle; for many miles about[3535][3536]
    There's scarce a bush.[3535][3537]

    _Reg._                 O, sir, to wilful men
    The injuries that they themselves procure                        300
    Must be their schoolmasters. Shut up your doors:
    He is attended with a desperate train;
    And what they may incense him to, being apt[3538]
    To have his ear abused, wisdom bids fear.

    _Corn._ Shut up your doors, my lord; 'tis a wild night:[3539]    305
    My Regan counsels well: come out o' the storm.      [_Exeunt._[3540]

FOOTNOTES:

[3061] ACT II. SCENE I.] ACT II. SCENE II. Eccles.

The ... castle.] A Castle belonging to the Earl of Gloster. Rowe. A
Room in Gloster's Castle. Capell. A court within the castle of the earl
of Gloster. Malone.

Enter ... meeting.] Enter Bastard, and Curan meetes him. Q₁ Q₃. Enter
Bast. and Curan meeting. Q₂. Enter Bastard, and Curan, severally. Ff.

[3062] Edm.] Bast. Qq Ff.

[3063] _And ... night._] Prose in Qq. Four lines, ending _bin ...
notice ... Duchesse ... night,_ in Ff.

[3064] _you_] _your_ F₁.

[3065] _Regan_] Omitted in Qq.

[3066] _this night_] Ff. _to night_ Qq.

[3067] _they_] Ff. _there_ Qq.

[3068] _ear-kissing_] Ff. _eare-bussing_ Qq.

[3069] _Not I: pray_] Ff. _Not, I pray_ Qq.

[3070] Cur. _Have ... word._] Omitted in Q₁ Q₃.

[3071] _Have ... Albany?_] Prose in Qq. Two lines, the first ending
_toward,_ in Ff.

[3072] _toward_] Ff. _towards_ Q₂.

[3073] _the_] Ff. _the two_ Q₂.

[3074] _You ... sir._] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_do_] om. Qq.

[Exit.] om. Q₂.

[3075] SCENE II. Pope.

[3076] _The duke ... consort._] Verse in Ff. Prose in Qq.

[3077] _better! best!_] Pope. _better best,_ Qq Ff. _better, best,_
Rowe.

[3078] _queasy_] _quesie_ Qq. _queazie_ F₁ F₃. _queazy_ F₂ F₄.

[3079] _Which ... work_] _Which must aske breefenesse and fortune
helpe_ Qq (_breefnes_ Q₂). _Which must aske breefnes and fortune's
helpe._ Anon. conj. MS. See note (V).

[3080] Enter Edgar.] To him, enter Edgar. Theobald. Enter Edgar. After
_which_, line 18, in Q₁ Q₃; opposite line 15 in Q₂; after _worke_, line
18, in Ff.

[3081] _sir_] om. Qq.

[3082] _You have_] _You've_ Pope.

[3083] _'gainst_] Ff. _gainst_ Q₂. _against_ Q₁ Q₃.

_Cornwall?_] _Cornwall ought,_ Qq.

[3084] _hither_] _hether_ Qq.

_i' the night_] _i' th' night_ Ff (_ith'_ F₂). _in the night_ Qq.

_i' the haste_] _haste_ Pope. _in haste_ Hanmer.

[3085] _Upon ... 'gainst_] _Against his party, for_ Johnson conj.

_'gainst_] _against_ Qq.

[3086] _yourself._] _your--_ Qq.

_I am_] _I'm_ Pope.

[3087] _me: In cunning_] Ff. _me in crauing_ Qq.

[3088] _Draw:_] Omitted in Qq.

_Draw ... well._] One line in Capell. Two, the first ending _your
selfe_, in Ff.

[3089] _ho,_] _hoa,_ Ff. _heere,_ Q₁ Q₃. _here,_ Q₂.

[3090] _brother_] _brother flie_ Qq.

_Torches, torches_] Qq F₁. _Torches_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[Exit Edgar.] Ff. Omitted in Qq.

[3091] [Wounds his arm.] Rowe. om. Qq Ff.

[3092] _I have_] _I've_ Pope.

[3093] _Father, father_] _Why, father, father_ Capell. _Father, father,
father_ Keightley.

[3094] and ... torches.] Ff. Omitted in Qq.

[3095] SCENE III. Pope.

_where's_] _where is_ Q₂.

[3096] _Mumbling_] Ff. _warbling_ Qq.

_stand's_] Q₂. _stand his_ Q₁ Q₃. _stand_ Ff.

_mistress_.] _mistress_:--Capell. _mistress_,--Dyce (reading _stand_
with Ff).

[3097] _villain, Edmund_] _villaine Edmund_ Q₂.

[3098] _sir. When_] Capell. _sir, when_ Qq Ff.

_could_--] Qq F₃ F₄. _could_. F₁. _could_ F₂.

[3099] _ho_] om. Qq.

_after.... By_] _after. By_ Ff. _after, by_ Q₁ Q₂. _after him, by_ Q₃.

[Exeunt some Servants.] Dyce. Exit Servant. Capell. om. Qq Ff.

[3100] _revenging_] Ff. _revengive_ Qq.

[3101] _their thunders_] Qq. _the thunder_ Ff. _their thunder_ Heath
conj.

[3102] _in fine_] Ff. _in a fine_ Qq.

[3103] _in_] Ff. _with_ Qq.

[3104] _lanced_] _lanc'd_ Theobald. _launcht_ Q₁ Q₃. _lancht_ Q₂.
_latch'd_ Ff.

_mine_] _my_ Theobald.

[3105] _But when_] Qq. _And when_ Ff. _But whether_ Collier (Collier
MS.)

_alarum'd_] F₁ F₂ F₃. _alarumd_ Qq. _alarm'd_ F₄. _alarmed_ Rowe.

[3106] _quarrel's right_] _quarrels, rights_ Q₂.

[3107] _gasted_] '_gasted_ Capell. '_ghasted_ Jennens.

[3108] _Full_] Ff. _but_ Qq.

[3109] _And found--dispatch._] Steevens. _and found; dispatch,_ Q₁
Ff Q₃. _and found, dispatch,_ Q₂. _and found; dispatch_-- Pope. _for
dispatch_ Hanmer. _and found, dispatch'd._--Warburton. _Unfound;
dispatch._--Singer conj. (withdrawn). _And found,--! Dispatch_-- Brae
conj.

[3110] _worthy_] _worth_ F₄.

_arch and patron_] and _arch-patron_ Theobald. _arch-patron_ Anon. MS.
See note (V).

[3111] _which_] _who_ Theobald (ed. 2).

[3112] _caitiff_] _caytiffe_ Q₁ Q₃. _caytife_ Q₂. _coward_ Ff.

[3113] _death._] _shall abide the death._ Seymour conj.

[3114] _could the reposure_.... _Make_] _the reposal.... Would make_
Hanmer.

[3115] _could the reposure_] Qq. _would the reposall_ Ff (_reposal_ F₃
F₄).

[3116] _what I should_] Qq. _what should I_ Ff. _by what I should_
Rowe. _what I'd_ Hanmer. _when I should_ Warburton.

[3117] _ay_, _though_] _I though_ Qq. _though_ Ff. _although_ Rowe (ed.
2).

[3118] _I'ld_] _I'll_ F₄. _would_ Hanmer.

[3119] _damned practice_] _damn'd pretense_ Collier conj.

_practice_] F₃ F₄. _practise_ F₁ F₂. _pretence_ Qq.

[3120] _must_] _maist_ Anon. conj. MS. See note (V).

[3121] _very_] om. Steevens's reprint of Q₁. See note (IX).

_spurs_] _spurres_ Qq. _spirits_ Ff.

[3122] _Strong and fasten'd_] _Strong and fastened_ Q₁. _Strong and
fastned_ Q₂ Q₃. _O strange and fastned_ Ff. _O strange, fasten'd_ Pope.
_Strange, and fasten'd_ Capell MS.

[3123] _I never got him._] Qq. _said he?_ Ff. _said he? hark!_ Hanmer.

[Tucket within.] Ff (after _seek it_, line 77). Omitted in Qq. Trumpets
within. Rowe.

[3124] _why_] Qq. _wher_ F₁. _where_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _wher'_ Knight.

[3125] _due_] Ff. om. Qq.

[3126] Enter ...] Ff. Enter the Duke of Cornwall. Qq.

[3127] SCENE IV. Pope.

[3128] _strange news_] _strange newes_ Qq. _strangenesse_ F₁ F₂.
_strangeness_ F₃ F₄.

[3129] _dost_] Qq F₁. _does_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[3130] _O, madam,_] Omitted in Qq.

_is ... is_] Qq. _is ... it's_ Ff.

[3131] _named? your Edgar?_] _nam'd, your Edgar?_ Ff. _named your
Edgar?_ Q₁ Q₂. _named your Edgar._ Q₃. _nam'd, your Edgar? He?_ Hanmer.
_nam'd? your heir, your Edgar?_ Collier (Collier MS.) _nam'd? your
Edgar, Gloster?_ Lettsom conj.

[3132] _O_] Ff. _I_ Qq. _Ay_ Anon. conj.

_it_] om. Q₃.

[3133] _not_] om. Collier MS.

[3134] _tend upon_] Theobald. _tends upon_ Qq. _tended upon_ Ff.
_tended on_ Hanmer.

[3135] _'tis_] _it is_ Capell, ending lines 95, 96 _at madam ... was_.

[3136] _madam_] _madam, yes_ Collier (Collier MS.)

_of that consort_] Ff. Omitted in Qq and Capell. _one of that consort_
Dyce conj.

[3137] _the waste and spoil of his_] _the wast and spoyle of his_ Q₂
(Bodl. 1, 2. Mus. per. and imp.) _these--and waste of this his_ Q₁ Q₃.
_these--and wast of this his_ Q₂ (Cap. and Dev.) _th' expence and wast
of his_ F₁. _th' expence and wast of_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[3138] _That ... there._] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

[3139] _Nor ... office._] As in Ff. Prose in Qq.

[3140] _assure_] _I assure_ Theobald (ed. 2).

[3141] _hear_] F₃ F₄. _heare_ F₁ F₂. _heard_ Qq.

[3142] _'Twas_] _Twas_ Qq. _It was_ F₁ F₂. _It is_ F₃ F₄. _It's_ Pope.

[3143] _bewray_] Ff. _betray_ Qq.

[3144] _lord_] _lord, he is_ Hanmer.

[3145] _If he ... seize on._] Verse in Ff. Prose in Qq.

[3146] _For_] Qq F₁. _as for_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

_Edmund_] _good Edmund_ Keightley.

[3147] _doth this instant_] _in this instance_ Warburton. _doth, in
this instance_ Jennens (Heath conj.) _doth, at this instant_ Capell
conj.

[3148] _commend_] _commends_ Warburton.

[3149] _need: You we_] Ff. _need, you we_ Q₁ Q₃. _need you, we_ Q₂.

[3150] _I shall ... else._] Arranged as by Pope. One line in Qq Ff.

[3151] _sir_] Ff. om. Qq and Jennens, who ends the line at _truly_.

[3152] _For him_] om. Pope.

[3153] _came_] _come_ Capell conj.

_you,--_] _you--_ Rowe (ed. 1). _you?_ Qq F₁ F₂. _you._ F₃ F₄. _you_
Rowe (ed. 2), continuing the next line to 'Corn.'

[3154] _threading_] _thredding_ Ff. _threatning_ Qq. _treading_
Theobald conj.

[3155] _poise_] _poyse_ Q₂ (Bodl. 1, 2. Mus. per. and imp.) _prize_ Q₁
Ff Q₃. _prise_ Q₂ (Cap. and Dev.) _price_ Capell (Johnson conj.)

[3156] _advice_:] _advices_: Capell. After this Keightley marks a line
omitted.

[3157] _differences_] Ff. _diferences_ Q₂ (Bodl. 1, 2. Mus. per. and
imp.) _defences_ Q₁ Q₂ (Cap. and Dev.) Q₃.

_least_] Edd. _lest_ Q₂ (Bodl. 1, 2. Mus. per. and imp.) _best_ Q₁ Q₂
(Cap. and Dev.) Ff Q₃. See note (VIII).

[3158] _home_] Q₂ (Bodl. 1, 2. Mus. per. and imp.) Ff. _hand_ Q₁ Q₂
(Cap. and Dev.) Q₃.

[3159] _Lay ... use._] As in Ff. Two lines, the first ending
_counsell_, in Qq.

[3160] _business_] _businesse_ Q₁ Q₃. _busines_ Q₂. _businesses_ Ff.

[3161] _craves_] Qq Ff. _crave_ Rowe.

[Exit. Q₁ Q₃. Exeunt. Q₂.

[3162] _I serve ... welcome._] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

[3163] [Flourish. Exeunt.] Exeunt. Flourish. F₁. Exeunt. F₂ F₃ F₄. om.
Qq.

[3164] SCENE II.] SCENE V. Pope. Rowe and Theobald continue the Scene.
SCENE III. Eccles.

Before....] Before the Castle. Capell.

Enter....] Collier. Enter Kent, and Steward severally. Ff. Enter Kent,
and Steward. Qq.

[3165] Osw.] Collier. Steward. or Stew. Qq Ff.

[3166] _dawning_] Ff. _euen_ Qq (_deuen_ Q₂ (Bodl. 1)). _evening_ Pope.
_downing_ Warburton. _awning_ Jackson conj.

_this_] Ff. _the_ Qq.

[3167] _I' the_] _I' th'_ F₁. _It'h_ Q₂. _I th'_ F₂ F₃ F₄. In the Q₁ Q₃.

[3168] _Prithee_] _Prythee_ F₁ F₃ F₄. _Prethee_ Qq F₂.

_lovest_] _lov'st_ Ff. _love_ Qq.

[3169] _Lipsbury_] _Ledbury_ Jennens conj. _Finsbury_ Collier (Collier
MS.)

_I would_] _I'd_ Capell MS.

[3170] _three suited_] _third-suited_ Farmer conj. _tree-suited_
Jackson conj. _thread-suited_ Anon. conj.

_three-suited, hundred-pound_] _three shewted hundred pound_ Qq
(_snyted_ Q₂ Bodl. 1). _three-suited-hundred pound_ F₁. _three-suited,
hundred pound_ F₂ F₃ F₄ (_thre_ F₃).

[3171] _worsted-stocking_] _worsted-stocken_ Qq (_wosted stocken_ Q₂
Bodl. 1). _woosted-stocking_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _woosted stocking_ F₄.

[3172] _knave; a_] om. Ff.

_superservicable, finical_] _super-finicall_ Qq.

[3173] _one-trunk-inheriting_] F₃ F₄. _one trunke-inheriting_ F₁ F₂. No
hyphen in Qq.

[3174] _one_] Ff. om. Qq.

[3175] _clamorous_] Qq F₃ F₄. _clamours_ F₁ F₂.

_deniest_] _deny'st_ Ff. _deny_ Q₁ Q₃. _denie_ Q₂.

_thy_] Ff. _the_ Qq.

[3176] _Why_] Ff. om. Qq.

[3177] _on one_] _against one_ Capell MS.

_that is_] Ff. _that's_ Qq.

[3178] _ago_] om. Ff.

[3179] _tripped ... thee_] _tript ... thee_ Ff. _beate thee, and tript
up thy heeles_ Qq (_beat_ Q₂).

[3180] _yet_] Ff. om. Qq.

[3181] _sop_] _fop_ Theobald conj. (withdrawn).

_o' the_] _o' th'_ F₃ F₄. _oth'_ F₁ F₂. _of the_ Qq.

_of you_] Ff. _a' you_ Qq.

_draw_] Qq. om. Ff.

_cullionly_] _cullyonly_ Q₁ Q₂. _cullyenly_ F₁ F₂. _cully only_ Q₃.
_culleinly_ F₃ F₄.

[3182] [Drawing his sword.] Rowe.

[3183] _come with_] Ff. _bring_ Qq.

[3184] _royalty of her_] _royalty, her_ Capell.

[3185] _shanks:_] _shankes,_ Qq Ff. _shanks--_ Rowe.

[3186] _rogue; stand, you_] _rogue, stand you_ Qq Ff. _rogue, stand;
you_ Steevens (1778).

[3187] [Beating him.] Rowe.

[3188] _murder! murder!_] _murther, murther._ Ff. _murther, helpe._ Qq.

Enter....] Edd. (Globe ed.) Enter Edmund with his Rapier drawne,
Glocester, the Duke and Dutchesse. Qq (Gloster Q₂). Enter Bastard,
Cornewall, Regan, Gloster, Servants. Ff (Servant. F₂ F₃ F₄). Enter
Edmund. Stauton (Dyce).

[3189] SCENE VI. Pope.

[3190] Edm.] Bast. Qq Ff.

[3191] [Parting them.] Edd. _Part._ Ff. om. Qq. See note (X).

[3192] _an_] Staunton. _and_ Qq. _if_ Ff.

[3193] _flesh_] Ff. _fleash_ Qq. _you_] Qq. _ye_ Ff.

Enter Cornwall, Regan, Gloucester, and Servants. Staunton. Enter
Gloster. Dyce (ed. 2).

[3194] _Weapons! arms!_] Capell. _Weapons? Armes?_ Ff. _Weapons,
armes,_ Qq.

Enter Cornwall, Regan, and Servants. Dyce (ed. 2).

[3195] _Keep ... matter?_] As in Cappell. Prose in Qq Ff.

[3196] _What is_] Ff. _what's_ Qq.

[3197] _messengers_] _messenger_ Grant White.

_king._] Qq. _king?_ Ff.

[3198] _What is_] Ff. _What's_ Q₁ Q₃. _Whats_ Q₂.

_difference? speak._] Rowe. _difference, speake?_ Qq Ff.

[3199] _No ... man?_] Prose in Qq Ff. Four lines, ending _valour, ...
thee; ... fellow: ... man?_ in Capell.

[3200] _in_] _all share in_ Rowe.

[3201] _man?_] Ff. _man._ Qq.

[3202] _Ay,_] _I,_ Qq. om. Ff.

_sir:_] _sir;_ Q₂ F₂ F₃ F₄. _sir,_ Q₁ F₁ Q₃.

[3203] _he_] Q₁ Q₃. _hee_ Q₂. _they_ Ff.

[3204] _hours_] Q₃. _houres_ Q₁ Q₂. _yeares_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _years_ F₄.

_at the_] Qq. _oth'_ F₁ F₂. _o' th'_ F₃ F₄.

[3205] _yet_] _you_ Pope.

[3206] _This ... spared_] Prose in Qq Ff. One line of verse in Capell.

_ruffian_] _ruffen_ Q₂.

[3207] _gray beard,--_] _gray beard-_ Rowe. _gray-beard._ Qq F₁ F₂.
_gray beard._ F₃ F₄.

[3208] _zed!_] _C!_ Johnson conj.

[3209] _you will_] _you'l_ Q₂.

[3210] _walls_] _wals_ Q₁ Q₃. _walles_ Q₂. _wall_ Ff.

_of a jakes_] _of a Iaques_ Q₁. _of a iaques_ Q₂. _of a Iakes_ F₁ F₂.
_of Iaques_ Q₃. _of a Jakes_ F₃ F₄.

[3211] _gray beard_] Q₂. _gray-beard_ Q₁ Ff Q₃.

[3212] _Peace ... reverence?_] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

[3213] _sirrah_] Ff. _sir_ Qq.

[3214] _know you no reverence?_] Ff. _you have no reverence._ Qq.

[3215] _hath_] Ff. _has_ Qq.

[3216] _Who_] Ff. _That_ Qq.

_as these_] Put at the beginning of line 69 by Pope (reading _those_ as
Qq). om. Hanmer.

[3217] _the holy_] Ff. _those_ Qq. _those holy_ Jennens. _the boly_
Grimes conj. MS.

_a-twain_ F₃ F₄. _a twaine_ F₁ F₂. _in twaine_ Qq. Malone would read
with Qq, ending line 69, _which are_.

[3218] _Which are too intrinse_] Malone. _Which are t' intrince,_ F₁.
_Which art t' intrince,_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _Which are to intrench,_ Qq. _Too
intricate_ Pope. _Too 'intrinsecate_ Theobald. _Too intrinsick_ Hanmer.
_Too intresse_ or _Too intrigue_ Singer conj.

_to unloose;_] _t' unloose:_ Ff. _to inloose_ Qq. _to enloose_ Seymour
conj.

_smooth_] _sooth_ Pope. _smothe_ (i.e. _smother_) Becket conj.

[3219] _natures_] _nature_ Pope.

_rebel_] _rebels_ Pope.

[3220] _Bring_] Qq. _Being_ Ff.

_fire_] Ff. _stir_ Qq.

_their_] Qq. _the_ Ff.

[3221] _Renege_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _Reneag_ Qq. _Revenge_ F₁.

[3222] _gale_] _gall_ F₁.

_vary_] _varry_ F₁.

[3223] _Knowing ... fool?_] Two lines, the first ending _epeliptick,_
in Q₂.

[3224] _Knowing_] _As knowing_ Pope. _And knowing_ Collier (Collier
MS.) _Knowing of_ Anon. conj.

_nought_] Qq. _naught_ Ff.

_dogs_] F₄. _dogges_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _daies_ Q₁ Q₂. _dayes_ Q₂.

[3225] _Smile you_] F₄. _Smoile you_ Q₁ F₁ F₂ Q₃ F₃. _smoyle you_ Q₂.
_Smile at_ Collier MS. _Smile you at_ Keightley.

[3226] _if_] Q₁ Ff Q₃. _and_ Q₂.

[3227] _drive ye_] Ff. _send you_ Qq. _drive you_ Capell.

_Camelot_] Ff. _Camulot_ Qq.

[3228] _What, ... out?_] As one line in Steevens (1793).

[3229] _out? say that._] Pope. _out, say that?_ Qq Ff.

_say that._] om. Seymour conj.

[3230] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_What is his fault_] Ff. _What's his offence_ Qq.

[3231] _does_] Q₂. _do's_ Ff. _doth_ Q₁ Q₃.

_nor ... nor_] Ff. _or ... or_ Qq.

[3232] _Than_] Q₁. _Then_ Ff Q₃. _That_ Q₂.

_stands_] _stand_ Pope.

[3233] _This ... nicely._] As in Ff. Nine lines, ending _praised ...
ruffines, ... nature, ... plaine, ... so, ... know, ... craft, ...
ducking ... nicely,_ in Qq.

[3234] _some_] Ff. _a_ Qq.

[3235] _roughness_] _ruffines_ Qq.

[3236] _cannot_] _can't_ Pope.

[3237] _An ... plain_] _he must be plaine_ Qq.

[3238] _An_] Pope. _And_ Ff. _and_ Qq.

_take it, so_] Rowe. _take it so_ Q₁ Ff Q₃. _tak't so_ Q₂.

[3239] _plainness_] A full stop here in F₂ F₃ F₄.

[3240] _more_] _far_ Pope.

[3241] _silly_] _silky_ Hanmer (Warburton).

_silly ducking_] Qq. _silly-ducking_ Ff.

[3242] _faith, in_] Ff. _sooth, or in_ Qq.

[3243] _great_] Ff. _grand_ Q₁ Q₃. _graund_ Q₂.

[3244] _On_] Ff. _In_ Qq. _Or_ Rowe.

_flickering_] Pope. _flitkering_ Q₁ Q₂. _fletkering_ Q₃. _flicking_ Ff.

_front,--_] _front--_ Rowe. _front._ Qq Ff.

_by_] _thou by_ Qq.

[3245] _dialect_] Ff. _dialogue_ Qq.

[3246] _he_] _but he_ Hanmer.

_beguiled_] _beguil'd_ F₃ F₄. _beguild_ The rest.

[3247] _to entreat_] _that entreat_ Badham conj.

[3248] _to't_] F₃ F₄. _too't_ Q₂ F₁ F₂. _to it_ Q₁ Q₃.

[3249] _What was_] Ff. _What's_ Qq.

[3250] _I ... any_] _Never any_ Hanmer.

[3251] _I ... misconstruction;_] As in Ff. Two lines, the first ending
_master,_ in Qq.

[3252] _late_] _lately_ Rowe.

[3253] _misconstruction_] _misinstruction_ Anon. conj. MS. See note (V).

[3254] _conjunct_] _coniunct_ Qq. _compact_ Ff.

[3255] _man, That_] Ff. _man, that That_ Q₁ Q₃. _man, that, That_ Q₂.
_man That't_ Anon. conj.

[3256] _fleshment_] Ff. _flechuent_ Q₁ Q₂. _flechvent_ Q₃.

_dread_] Qq. _dead_ Ff. _dear_ Anon. conj.

[3257] _again_] om. Steevens (1793).

[3258] _None ... fool_] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

[3259] _Ajax_] F₂ F₃ F₄. _A'Iax_ Qq. _Aiax_ F₁.

_their_] _there_ F₁.

_fool_] _foil_ Hanmer (Warburton).

_Fetch ... stocks!_] _Fetch ... stocks?_ Ff (_stockes?_ F₂). _Bring ...
stockes ho?_ Qq. _Fetch ... stocks, ho!_ Steevens (1778).

[3260] _stubborn ancient_] _stubborn-ancient_ S. Walker conj.

_ancient_] Ff. _miscreant_ Qq (_ausrent_ Q₂ Bodl. 1).

_reverend_] _rev'rend_ Pope. _reverent_ Q₂ Ff. _unreverent_ Q₁.
_unreverant_ Q₃.

[3261] _you--_] Theobald, _you._ Qq Ff.

_Sir,_] Ff. om. Qq.

[3262] _Sir, I am ... you_] As in Ff. _I am ... you_ As two lines, the
first ending _me,_ in Qq.

[3263] _employment_] _imployment_ Ff. _imploiments_ Q₁. _imployments_
Q₂ Q₃.

[3264] _shall_] Ff. _should_ Qq.

_respect_] Qq. _respects_ Ff.

[3265] _Stocking_] Ff. _Stopping_ Qq.

[3266] _Fetch ... noon._] As in Qq. Two lines, the first ending
_stocks;_ in Ff.

[3267] _stocks!_] _stockes?_ Q₂. _stockes;_ Q₁ F₂. _stocks;_ F₁ F₃ F₄.

_and honour_] om. Hanmer.

[3268] _noon!_] _noone?_ Ff. _noone._ Qq.

[3269] _Why, ... so._] As in Ff. Prose in Qq.

[3270] _should_] Ff. _could_ Q₁ Q₂. _cold_ Q₃.

[3271] _self-same colour_] _same nature_ Q₁ Q₃. _selfe same nature_ Q₂.

[3272] _speaks of_] _speakes off_ Q₁ Q₃. _speake of_ Q₂.

_Come_] om. Pope.

[Stocks brought out.] As in Dyce. After line 132 in Ff. Omitted in Qq.

[3273] _His ... restrain'd._] See note (XI).

[3274] _basest_] _belest_ Q₂ (Bodl. 1).

_contemned'st_] Capell. _temnest_ Qq (_contaned_ Q₂ Bodl. 1). _the
meanest_ Pope.

[3275] _he, so ... Should_] _he so ... Should_ F₁ F₂. _hee's so ...
should_ Qq. _he's so ... Should_ F₃ F₄. _he's so ... To_ Rowe.

[3276] _much more_] _yet much_ Hanmer.

[3277] _gentleman_] _gentlemen_ Q₂.

[3278] _For ... legs._] Omitted in Ff.

[3279] _Put in his legs_] A stage-direction. Seymour conj.

[Kent ...] As in Pope. After line 142 in Rowe. om. Qq Ff.

[3280] _Come_] Qq. Corn. _Come_ Ff.

_good lord_] Q₂. _lord_ Q₁ Ff Q₃. _lord, let's_ Capell conj. MS.

[Exeunt ...] Exeunt Cor. Reg. Edm. Ste. and Ser. Capell. Exit. Q₁ Ff
Q₃. om. Q₂. Exeunt Regan and Cornwall. Pope.

[3281] SCENE VI. Pope and Hanmer (a misprint). SCENE VII. Warburton.

_I am_] _Im_ Pope.

_duke's_] _duke_ F₁.

[3282] _rubb'd_] _ruled_ Anon. conj.

[3283] _Pray_] Ff. _Pray you_ Qq.

_I have_] _I've_ Pope.

_travelld_] _traveld_ F₃ F₄. _travaild_ Qq. _travaild_ F₁ F₂.

[3284] _Some time_] _Sometime_ Q₂.

_out_] _out_ Q₂.

[3285] _The ... taken._] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_to blame_] Q₂ F₃ F₄. _too blame_ Q₁ F₁ F₂ Q₃.

_'twill ... taken._] [to Edm.] _'twill be ill taken._ Capell conj. MS.
(withdrawn).

_taken_] Ff. _tooke_ Qq.

[Exit.] om. Q₂. Exeunt Gloster, Edmund, and Servants. Capell conj. MS.
(withdrawn).

[3286] _Thou_] _That_ Johnson.

[3287] _Approach ... remedies._] Put in the margin by Hanmer.

[3288] [Looking up to the moon. Pope. Addressing the absent sun, and
wishing for its return. Rann (Malone conj.)

[3289] _miracles_] Ff. _my wracke_ Q₁ Q₂ (Cap. Dev. Mus. per. & imp.
and Bodl. 2) Q₃. _my rackles_ Q₂ (Bodl. 1).

[3290] _misery: I know_] _miserie. I know_ Ff. _misery, I know_ Qq.
_misery, I know._--Jennens.

[Reading the letter. Johnson. Opening the letter. Jennens.

[3291] _most_] _not_ Q₂ (Bodl. 1).

[3292] _course; and_] _course. And_ Ff. _course, and_ Qq. _course. I_
Rowe. See note (XII).

[3293] _shall ... From_] _she'll ... For_ Daniel conj. _shell ...
From_ Staunton.

[3294] _state, seeking_] _state-seeking_ Johnson conj. _states
sinking_ Jackson conj.

[3295] _o'er-watchd,_] _ore-watchd_ Ff. _ouer-watcht,_ Q₁ Q₃.
_ouerwatch_ Q₂. _oer-watchd!_ S. Walker conj.

[3296] _Take_] _Late_ Q₂ (Bodl. 1).

[3297] _This ... wheel!_] As in Pope. In Qq Ff the first line ends
_goodnight._

[3298] _smile ... turn_] _Smile once more, turn_ Ff. _Smile, once more
turne_ Q₁ Q₂. _Smile once more turne_ Q₃.

[Sleeps.] sleepes. Q₂. He sleepes. Q₁ Q₃. om. Ff.

[3299] SCENE III.] Steevens. SCENE VII. Pope. SCENE VIII. Johnson.
SCENE IV. Eccles. The Folios, Rowe, Warburton, and Capell continue the
scene.

A wood.] Staunton. A part of a Heath. Theobald. A part of the heath.
Steevens. A part of the neighbouring country. Eccles. The open country.
Dyce.

Enter Edgar.] Qq Ff. Enter Edgar, at a Distance. Capell.

[3300] _I heard_] F₁ F₂ F₃. _I heare_ Qq. _I have heard_ F₄. _I've
heard_ Pope.

[3301] _unusual_] _unusall_ Q₁ F₁ F₂ Q₃.

[3302] _Does_] _Do's_ Ff. _Dost_ Qq. _Doth_ Anon. conj. MS. See note
(V).

_taking. Whiles_] Ff. _taking while_ Qq.

[3303] _most_] _the_ Pope.

[3304] _elf_] _elfe_ F₁. _else_ Qq F₂. _put_ F₃ F₄. _tye_ Anon. MS. See
note (V).

_hair_] F₄. _haire_ Q₁ Q₂. _haires_ F₁ F₂. _heare_ Q₃. _hairs_ F₃.

_in_] Ff. _with_ Qq.

[3305] _winds_] F₃ F₄. _windes_ F₁ F₂. _winde_ Q₁. _wind_ Q₂ Q₃.

_persecutions_] Ff. _persecution_ Qq.

[3306] _precedent_] Johnson, _president_ Qq Ff.

[3307] _Strike_] _Stick_ S. Walker conj.

_and_] om. Q₂ (Bodl. 1).

_bare_] Qq. om. Ff.

[3308] _Pins_] _Pies_ Q₂ (Bodl. 1).

_wooden_] Q₁ Q₂ F₃ F₄ _wodden_ Q₂ F₁ F₂.

[3309] _from_] _frame_ Q₂ (Bodl. 1).

_farms_] F₄. _farmes_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _seruice_ Qq.

[3310] _sheep-cotes_] _sheep-coates_ Qq. _sheeps-coates_ F₁.
_sheepes-coates_ F₂. _sheep's-coats_ F₃. _sheeps-coats_ F₄.

_mills_] _miles_ Q₃.

[3311] _Sometime_] Qq. _Sometimes_ Ff.

_sometime_] Qq F₁. _sometimes_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[3312] _their_] _reer_ Warburton conj.

_Turlygod_] _Tuelygod_ Q₂ (Bodl. 1). _Turlygood_ Theobald. _Turlurù_
Hanmer. _Turlupin_ Warburton conj.

[3313] SCENE IV.] Steevens. SCENE VIII. Pope. SCENE IX. Warburton (an
error). SCENE IX. Johnson. Ff, Rowe and Capell continue the Scene.

Before ... castle.] Changes again to the Earl of Glo'ster's Castle.
Pope.

Kent ...] Dyce.

Enter ...] Ff. Enter King, and a Knight. Q₁ Q₃. Enter King. Q₂.

[3314] _home_] Ff. _hence_ Qq.

[3315] _messenger_] _messengers_ F₁ F₂.

[3316] _As I ... remove._] As in Ff. Two lines, the first ending _was_,
in Qq.

[3317] _in them_] Ff. om. Qq.

[3318] _this_] Ff. _his_ Qq.

[3319] _Ha!_] _Ha?_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _Ha_, F₄. _How_, Qq.

[3320] _Ha!... pastime?_] Arranged as by Steevens (1793), who reads,
_How!_ One line in Qq Ff.

_thy_] _ahy_ F₁.

[3321] _this_] om. Pope. _thy_ Theobald.

Kent. _No, my lord._] Omitted in Qq.

[3322] _Ha, ... nether-stocks._] Prose in Ff. Five lines in Qq.

[3323] _he_] Ff. _looke, he_ Qq.

_cruel_] _cruell_ F₁ F₂. _crewell_ Q₁ Q₂. _crewill_ Q₃. _crewel_ F₃ F₄.

_tied_] _tide tide_ F₂.

[3324] _heads_] Ff. _heeles_ Qq. _head_ Boswell.

[3325] _man's_] Q₁ Q₃. _mans_ Q₂. _man_ F₁. _man is_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[3326] _then_] _hen_ Q₁. _When_ Q₃.

_wooden_] _wodden_ F₁ F₂.

_nether-stocks_] _neather-stockes_ Q₁. _neatherstockes_ Q₂.
_neather-stocke_ Q₃. _nether socks_ Heath conj.

[3327] _What's ... here?_] As in Rowe. Prose in Qq. Three lines in Ff.

[3328] _It ... daughter._] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

[3329] _I say, yea._] _But I say, yea._ Hanmer.

[3330] Lear. _No ... have._] Qq. Omitted in Ff.

[3331] Kent. _By ... ay._ Lear.] Omitted in Qq.

[3332] _do't ... do't_] _do it ... do it_ Q₁ Q₃.

[3333] _could ... would_] Ff. _would ... could_ Qq.

[3334] _mightst_] _maist_ Q₁ Q₃. _may'st_ Q₂.]

_impose_] Ff. _purpose_ Qq.

[3335] _show'd_] _shew'd_ Pope. _shewed_ Qq Ff.

[3336] _came there_] _came_ Pope. _there came_ Jennens (a misprint).

[3337] _panting_] _painting_ F₁.

[3338] _salutations_] Qq F₁. _salutation_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[3339] _Deliver'd_] Ff. _Delivered_ Qq.

[3340] _whose_] Qq. _those_ Ff.

[3341] _meiny_] F₃ F₄. _meiney_ F₁ F₂. _men_ Qq.

[3342] _And_] _I,_ Jennens.

[3343] _that_] Qq. _which_ Ff.

[3344] _drew_] _I drew_ Rowe.

[3345] _The shame_] Ff. _This shame_ Qq.

[3346] Fool. _Winters ... year._] Omitted in Qq.

[3347] _Winter's_] F₃ F₄. _Winters_ F₁ F₂.

_wild_] _wil'd_ F₁.

[3348] _Fathers ... poor._] As in Pope. Three lines in Ff.

[3349] _this, ... daughters_] _this, it follows ... daughters dear_
Collier (Collier MS.), reading 52, 53 as four lines of rhyme.

[3350] _for thy_] F₁. _for thy deare_ F₂. _for thy dear_ F₃ F₄. _from
thy dear_ Theobald.

[3351] _Hysterica_] F₄. _Historica_ Qq F₁ F₂. _Hystorica_ F₃.

[3352] _With ... not;_] As in Qq Ff. One line in Steevens (1793).

[3353] _here_] Ff. om. Qq.

[3354] _here._] Ff. _there._ Q₁ Q₃. _there?_ Q₂.

[Exit.] Ff. om. Qq.

[3355] _Made ... of?_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_but_] Ff. _then_ Qq.

[3356] _None_] Ff. _No_ Qq.

[3357] _None ... train?_] _None: How ... number?_ Ff. _No, how ...
traine?_ Qq.

[3358] _train_] _traine_ Qq. _number_ Ff.

[3359] _An_] Pope. _And_ Q₂ Ff. _If_ Q₁ Q₃.

[3360] _i' the_] _i' th'_ F₁ F₃ F₄. _ith'_ F₂. _in the_ Qq.

[3361] _thou hadst_] Qq. _thou'dst_ Ff.

_deserved_] _deserve_, Pope, reading _thou'dst_ with Ff.

[3362] _All ... men;_] _All men are led by their eyes, but blind men,
and they follow their noses,_ Johnson conj.

[3363] _twenty_] Ff. _a hundred_ Q₁ Q₃. _a 100._ Q₂.

_stinking_] _sinking_ Mason conj.

[3364] _following it_] Qq. _following_ Ff.

[3365] _up the hill_] Qq. _upward_ Ff.

_him_] _it_ Hanmer.

[3366] [Sings. Anon. conj.

_That sir_] _That, sir,_ F₄.

_which_] Ff. _that_ Qq.

_and seeks_] om. Qq.

[3367] _That ... perdy._] Italics in Q₁ Q₃. Roman in Q₂ Ff.

[3368] _begins_] _begin_ Q₂.

_begins to rain_] _'gins rain_ Capell.

[3369] _the storm_] _a storm_ F₄.

[3370] _But_] _And_ F₃ F₄.

[3371] _wise man_] Qq F₄. _wiseman_ F₁ F₂ F₃.

[3372] _The knave ... knave,_] _The fool turns knave, that runs away,
The knave no fool,_ Collier, ed. 2 (Johnson conj.) _The fool turns
knave, that runs away; The fool's no knave,_ Heath conj. _The fool
turns knave, that runs away; The fool no knave,_ Capell.

[3373] _fool_] om. Qq.

[3374] Re-enter ...] Capell. Enter Lear and Glocester. Qq (Gloster Q₂).
Enter Lear, and Gloster: Ff (Glocester. Q₁ Q₃. Glower. F₂), after line
81.

[3375] SCENE IX. Pope. SCENE X. Warburton.

_Deny ... weary?_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_They are ... they are_] _they're ... they're_ Pope.

_sick?... weary?_] Johnson. _sicke, ... weary,_ Qq Ff.

[3376] _have travell'd_] F₄. _have travail'd_ F₁ F₂. _have travel'd_
F₃. _traveld_ Q₁. _traveled_ Q₂ Q₃.

_all the_] Ff. _hard to_ Qq.

[3377] _fetches; The_] _fetches, The_ Ff. _Iustice, I the_ Qq.
_fetches; ay, The_ Capell conj. _fetches all--The_ Steevens conj.
_fetches these; The_ Keightley.

[3378] _images_] _image'_ S. Walker conj.

[3379] _Fetch_] _Bring_ Pope.

[3380] _My dear ... wife._] As in Ff. Prose in Qq.

[3381] _plague! death!_] _plague, death,_ Ff. _death, plague,_ Qq.

[3382] _Fiery? what quality?_] Ff. _what fiery quality;_ Qq. _Fiery?
what fiery quality?_ Pope.

_Gloucester, Gloucester_] _Gloster, Gloster_ Qq Ff. _Glo'ster_ Pope.

_Fiery? what? quality?_ Taylor conj. MS.

[3383] Glo. _Well ... man?_] Ff. Omitted in Qq.

[3384] _The ... father_] One line in Qq. Two, the first ending
_Cornwall,_ in Ff.

_father_] _fate_ Q₂ (Bodl. 1).

[3385] _with his_] _with the_ Q₂ (Bodl. 1).

_commands her service_] Qq (_come and tends seruise_ Q₂ Bodl. 1).
_commands, tends, service_ Ff. _commands tends service_ Rowe (ed. 1).
_commands, tends service_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[3386] _Are ... blood!_] Omitted in Qq.

[3387] _'Fiery'?... that--_] Ff. _Fiery duke, tell the hot duke that
Lear,_ Qq (_The fierie_ Q₂ Bodl. 1).

_that--_] _that--_ [Glocester offers to go. Johnson.

[3388] _No_] _Mo_ Q₂ (Bodl. 1).

[3389] _Infirmity ... forbear;_] Divided as in Ff. Three lines, the
first two ending _health ... opprest,_ in Qq.

[3390] _Whereto_] Ff. _where to_ Qq.

_we are_] _we're_ Pope.

[3391] _commands_] _cōmand_ Q₂.

[3392] _fall'n_] F₃ F₄. _fallen_ Qq F₁ F₂.

_headier_] _heady_ Pope.

[3393] _To ... her_] Divided as in Ff. Three lines, the first two
ending _man, ... here?_ in Qq.

[3394] [Looking on Kent] Johnson. om. Qq Ff.

_wherefore_] _but wherefore_ Pope.

[3395] _act_] _very act_ Keightley.

_persuades_] _persuadeth_ Hanmer. _almost persuades_ Steevens conj.
_alone persuades_ Seymour conj.

[3396] _practice only. Give_] _practise only. Give_ F₁. _practise,
onely give_ Qq. _practise onely, Give_ F₂. _practice onely, Give_ F₃.
_practice only, give_ F₄.

[3397] _Go tell_] _Tell_ Qq.

_and's_] _and his_ Capell.

_I'ld_ F₄. _Il'd_ F₂ F₃. _Ile_ Qq.

[3398] _sleep to death_] Printed in italics by Johnson. _death to
sleep_ Mason conj.

[3399] _I would_] _I'd_ Capell.

[Exit.] Ff. om. Qq.

[3400] _O ... down!_] _O my heart! my heart._ Qq.

[3401] _cockney_] _cokney_ Q₂ (Cap. Dev. Mus. per. & imp. and Bodl. 2).
_coknay_ Q₂ (Bodl. 1). _cook-maid_ Badham conj.

[3402] _she_] Qq F₁. _hee_ F₂. _he_ F₃ F₄.

_put 'em i' the_] _put vm it'h_ Q₂. _put 'em i' th'_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _put
them up i' th_ Q₁ Q₃. _put them i' th'_ F₄.

_paste_] _pâst_ Q₂ (Cap. Dev. Mus. per. & imp. and Bodl. 2). _past_ Q₂
(Bodl. 1). _pasty_ Pope.

_she_] Qq Ff. _he_ Rowe.

_knapped 'em o' the_] _knapt 'em o' th'_ Ff. _knapt vm ath_ Qq.

[3403] _her_] _his_ F₃ F₄.

[3404] Re-enter....] Capell. Enter Duke and Regan. Qq. Enter Cornewall
Regan, Gloster, Servants. Ff.

[3405] SCENE X. POPE. SCENE XI. Warburton.

[Kent is set....] Rowe. Kent here set at liberty. Ff. Omitted in Qq.

[3406] _you_] _your_ F₁.

[3407] _shouldst not be_] _wert not_ Pope.

[3408] _divorce_] _deuose_ Q₂ (Bodl. 1).

_mother's_] _mother_ F₁.

_tomb_] _fruit_ Q₂ (Bodl. 1).

[3409] [To Kent] Rowe. om. Qq Ff.

_O_] Ff. _yea_ Qq.

[3410] _sister's_] F₃ F₄. _sisters_ F₁ F₂. _sister is_ Qq.

[3411] _tied Sharp-tooth'd unkindness,_] _tired Sharp-tooth'd
unkindness,_ Sympson conj. _tired, (Sharp-tooth'd unkindness!)_
Roderick conj.

[3412] _here:_] _heere._ Q₁. _heere,_ F₁ Q₃. _heare,_ Q₂. _here,_ The
rest.

[Points to his heart.] Pope. om. Qq Ff.

[3413] _thou'lt_] Ff. _thou't_ Q₁ Q₃. _thout_ Q₂.

[3414] _With how depraved_] _Of how deprived_ Q₁ Q₂ (_deptoued_ Q₂
(Bodl. 1)). _Of how depriyed_ Q₃. _Of how depravd_ Johnson and Anon.
conj. MS. See note (V).

_quality_--] Rowe. _quality_, Qq. _quality_. Ff.

[3415] _you_] om. Qq.

[3416] _scant_] Ff. _slacke_ Q₁ Q₂. _slack_ Q₃. _scan_ Hanmer.

[3417] Lear. _Say_, ... _blame_.] Omitted in Qq.

[3418] _Say, how is_] _How is_ Pope. _Ha! how's_ Capell conj.

[3419] _sir_,] om. Pope.

[3420] _Nature_ ... _return_;] Divided as in Ff. Four lines, the first
three ending _confine_, ... _discretion_ ... _your selfe_, in Qq.

[3421] _in you_] _on you_ Qq.

[3422] _her_] _his_ F₁.

[3423] _you_] om. Qq.

[3424] _her, sir_.] _her sir_. Q₁ Q₃. _her sir_? Q₂. _her._ Ff.

_Ask her_] _Ask of her_ Keightley, omitting _sir_ with Ff.

[3425] _but_] om. Qq.

_becomes the house:_] _becometh us:_ Hanmer. _becometh--thus._ Johnson
conj.

_the house:_] _the house,_ Q₂. _the house?_ The rest. _the use?_
Theobald. _me now:_ Jennens. _the mouth?_ Collier MS.

[3426] [Kneeling] The King kneeling. Hanmer. Om. Qq Ff. Kneeling.
Johnson, after line 151.

[3427] [Rising] Dyce (Collier MS.) om. Qq Ff.

_Never_] _No_ Qq.

[3428] _black_] _backe_ Q₁. _back_ Q₃. _blank_ Theobald.

_struck_] _stroke_ Q₁ Q₃. _strooke_ Q₂ Ff.

[3429] _All ... lameness._] Divided as in Ff. Two lines, the first
ending _top_, in Qq.

[3430] _ingrateful_] _ungrateful_ Johnson (1771).

_top_] _head_ Pope.

[3431] _You taking_] _Infecting_ Pope.

_Fie, sir, fie_] _Fie, fie sir_ Q₁ Q₃. _Fie fie sir_ Q₂.

[3432] Lear.] om. Q₂.

[3433] _sun To_] Edd. _sunne, To_ or _sun, To_ Qq Ff.

[3434] _To fall_] _Do, fall_ Johnson conj. _O, fall_ Capell. _To-fall_
Porson conj. MS. _Fall ye_ Anon. conj. MS. See note (V).

_and blast her pride._] Qq. _and blister._ Ff.

[3435] _O the_ ...] Divided as in Qq. The first line ends _Gods!_ in Ff.

[3436] _mood is on._] F₃ F₄. _moode is on._ F₁ F₂. _mood--_ Qq. _mood's
on._ Steevens (1793), dividing as in Ff.

[3437] _Thy_] _The_ Qq.

_tender-hefted_] Ff. _tender hested_ Q₁. _tēder hested_ Q₂. _tender
hasted_ Q₃. _tender-hearted_ Rowe (ed. 2) and Pope. _tender_ Seymour
conj., ending lines 164--168 _gods!... mood ... have ... give._

[3438] _Thy ... train,_] Divided as in Ff. Three lines, the first two
ending _ore ... burn,_ in Qq.

[3439] _Thee_] _the_ Q₂.

_o'er_] _are_ Q₃.

_harshness_] _rashness_ Johnson.

_her_] _no, her_ Seymour conj.

[3440] _know'st_] _knowest_ Qq.

[3441] _dues_] _and dues_ Rowe.

[3442] _hast thou_] _thou hast_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[3443] _endow'd_] Ff. _endowed_ Q₁ Q₃. _indow'd_ Q₂.

_to the_] _too'th_ Q₂.

[3444] [Tucket within.] Ff, after line 178. Transferred by Collier.
Trumpets within. Rowe.

[3445] _know't; my_] _know't, my_ F₁ F₄. _know't my_ Qq F₂ F₃.

_sister's_] _sister_ Q₃.

_letter_] Ff. _letters_ Qq.

[3446] Enter Oswald.] Dyce. Enter Steward. Qq, after _that?_ line 179.
Enter Steward. Ff, after _stocks?_ line 179. Enter Oswald. Collier,
after line 179.

[3447] _easy-borrow'd_] Capell. _easie borrowed_ Qq Ff. _easy-borrowed_
Theobald.

[3448] _fickle_] Qq. _fickly_ F₁ F₂. _sickly_ F₃ F₄.

_he_] _a_ Q₂.

[3449] SCENE XI. Pope. SCENE XII. Warburton.

Lear.] Ff. Gon. Qq.

_stock'd_] _stockt_ Ff. _strucke_ Q₁ Q₃. _struck_ Q₂.

_I have_] _I've_ Pope.

[3450] _Thou ... heavens,_] As in Pope. Two lines, the first ending
_ant_ or _on't_, in Qq Ff.

_on't_] Ff. _ant_ Q₁ Q₂. _ont_ Q₃.

_Who_] Ff. Lear. _Who_ Qq.

Enter Goneril.] As in Johnson. After _grace?_ (line 184) in Qq Ff.

_heavens_] _gods_ Anon. conj.

[3451] _If ... part!_] As in Ff. Three lines, the first two ending
_alow_ (_allow_ Q₂ Cap.) ... _cause,_ in Qq.

[3452] _your_] Ff. _you_ Qq.

[3453] _Allow_] _Hallow_ Theobald (Warburton).

_if_] _if you_ Ff.

[3454] [To Gon.] Johnson.

[3455] _wilt thou_] Qq. _will you_ Ff.

[3456] _finds_] _fines_ Warburton conj.

[3457] _Will ... stocks?_] As in Qq. Two lines in Ff.

_yet hold?_] _hold yet?_ Capell conj.

[3458] _sir_] Q₂ Ff. om. Q₁ Q₃.

[3459] _much less_] _no less_ Hanmer. _much more_ Johnson conj.

[3460] _weak_] _'wake_ Hanmer.

_seem so_] _deem't so_ Warburton.

[3461] _month_] F₄. _moneth_ Qq F₁ F₂ F₃.

[3462] _I am_] _I'm_ Pope.

[3463] _To wage ... owl,--_] Theobald transposed these lines.

[3464] _wage_] _wage war_ Keightley.

_o' the_] _oth'_ F₁ F₂. _o' th'_ F₃ F₄. _of the_ Qq.

[3465] _owl,--_] _owle,_ or _owl,_ Qq Ff. _howl_ Collier (Collier MS.)

[3466] _hot-blooded_] Pope. _hot-bloodied_ Ff. _hot blood in_ Qq
(_bloud_ Q₂).

[3467] _took ... brought_] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

[3468] _knee_] _knee to_ Anon. conj. MS. See note (V).

_beg_] _bag_ Q₂.

[3469] [Pointing ...] Dyce. Looking on the Steward. Johnson.

[3470] _I_] Ff. _Now I_ Qq.

[3471] _that's in_] Ff. _that lies within_ Qq.

[3472] _boil_] Malone. _byle_ Q₁ F₁ F₂ Q₃. _bile_ Q₂ F₃ F₄.

[3473] _A ... In my_] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

[3474] _plague-sore_] Hyphened in F₃ F₄.

_an_] Qq. _or_ Ff.

[3475] _call it_] _callit_ Q₂ (Dev.)

[3476] _thunder-bearer_] _thunder-beater_ Warburton.

[3477] _takes_] _tailes_ Q₂.

_high-judging_ Hyphened in Ff.

[3478] _Not ... passion_] Arranged as in Ff. Four lines, ending
_yet, ... welcome, ... those ... passion,_ in Qq.

[3479] _altogether so_] Ff. _altogether so sir_ Qq. _all together_
Pope. _allto so_ Seymour conj.

[3480] _look'd_] Ff. _looke_ Qq.

[3481] _sir_] Q₂ Ff. om. Q₁ Q₃.

[3482] _your_] _you_ F₂.

[3483] _you old_] Ff. _you are old_ Qq.

_so--_] Rowe. _so,_ Qq Ff.

[3484] _spoken_] Ff. _spoken now_ Qq.

[3485] _what, fifty_] Rowe. _what fifty_ Qq Ff.

[3486] _sith that_] _since_ Pope.

[3487] _Speak_] F₃ F₄. _Speake_ F₁ F₂. _Speakes_ Qq.

_one house_] Ff. _a house_ Qq.

[3488] _almost_] om. Seymour conj.

[3489] _Why ... you,_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_chanced_] _chanc'd_ Ff. _chancst_ Q₁. _chanc'st_ Q₂. _chancest_ Q₃.

_you_] Qq. _ye_ Ff.

[3490] _you will_] _you'll_ Pope.

[3491] _For ... danger,_] Put in parenthesis in Q₁ Ff Q₃.

[3492] _but_] om. F₃ F₄.

[3493] _all--_] Rowe. _all._ Qq Ff.

[3494] _kept_] _keep_ F₃ F₄.

_follow'd_] Pope. _followed_ Qq Ff.

[3495] _What_] om. Pope.

[3496] _twenty, Regan?_] Capell. _twenty, Regan,_ Q₁ Q₃. _twentie,
Regan_ Q₂. _twenty? Regan,_ Ff.

[3497] _speak't_] _speak it_ Capell.

[3498] _wicked ... wicked_] _wrinkled ... wrinkled_ Warburton.

[3499] _look_] _seeme_ Q₁ Q₃. _seem_ Q₂.

[3500] _the_] om. Pope.

[3501] [To Gon.] Hanmer.

[3502] _art_] _hast_ Pope.

[3503] _need_] _needs_ Q₁ Q₃. _needes_ Q₂.

[3504] _need_] _deed_ Qq.

[3505] _life's as_] Q₁ Q₃. _life as_ Q₂. _life is_ Ff.

_beast's_] Capell. _beasts_ Qq F₃ F₄. _beastes_ F₁ F₂. _beasts'_ Hanmer.

[3506] _wear'st_] Ff. _wearest_ Qq.

[3507] _warm. But ... need,--_] _warm; but ... need,--_ Warburton.
_warme, but ... need,_ Qq Ff.

[3508] _that patience, patience_] _that patience which_ Pope. _that:
patience, patience_ Jennens. _patience:--patience_ Mason conj.
_patience!--that_ or _that patience that_ Ritson conj. _that patience_
Grant White (Malone conj.) _but patience! that_ Collier MS. _but
patience that_ Collier conj. _your patience that_ Nicholson conj.

[3509] _man_] _fellow_ Qq.

[3510] _stirs_] F₄. _stirres_ Q₁ Q₂ F₁ F₂ F₃. _stirrs_ Q₃. _stir_ Rowe.

[3511] _so_] Ff. _too_ Q₁. _to_ Q₂ Q₃.

[3512] _tamely_] _lamely_ Qq.

[3513] _And let_] _O let_ Qq.

[3514] [Storm heard at a distance. Capell conj. MS.

[3515] _shall--_] Q₁ Ff Q₃. _shall,_ Q₂.

_things,--_] Capell. _things,_ Qq Ff.

[3516] _earth._] _earth;_ Q₁ Q₃ F₃. _earth,_ Q₂ F₄. _earth?_ F₁ F₂.

[3517] _No ... flaws,_] Arranged as by Steevens (1778). Two lines, the
first ending _weeping,_ in Qq Ff.

[3518] _I have_] _Though I have_ Hanmer, dividing as Qq Ff, and reading
with Pope.

_but this_] _This_ Pope.

[3519] _into a hundred thousand_] Ff. _in a 100. thousand_ Q₂. _in a
thousand_ Q₁ Q₃. _into a thousand_ Pope.

_flaws_] _flowes_ Qq.

[3520] _Or ere_] Q₂ F₁ F₂. _Ere_ Q₁ Q₃. _Or e'er_ F₃ F₄.

_I'll_] _ile_ Qq. _Ile_ F₁. _I_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[Exeunt ... Fool.] Q₁ Q₃, substantially. Exeunt Lear, Leister, Kent....
Q₂. Exeunt. Ff. Exeunt ... Gentleman, and Fool. Capell.

[3521] Corn.] Ff. Duke. Qq.

_withdraw; 'twill_] _withdraw us; it will_ Keightley.

[Storm and tempest.] Ff, after _weeping_, line 281. Transferred by
Pope. Omitted in Qq. Storm heard at a Distance. Capell, after
'Exeunt ... Fool.'

SCENE XII. Pope. _Scene xiii._ Warburton.

[3522] _Let ... folly._] As in Qq Ff. Four lines, ending _house ...
cannot ... put ... folly,_ in Capell. Keightley ends them _storm ...
people ... blame; ... folly._

[3523] _little_] _small_ Pope.

_and his_] Qq. _an'ds_ F₁. _and's_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[3524] _bestow'd_] Ff. _bestowed_ Qq.

[3525] _blame; hath_] Boswell. _blame hath_ Qq Ff. _blame, he 'ath_
Hanmer. _blame; he hath_ Capell.

[3526] _And_] _He_ Collier MS.

[3527] Gon.] Ff. Duke. Qq.

_purposed_] _puspos'd_ Q₂.

[3528] _So ... Gloucester?_] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

[3529] Corn.] Ff. Reg. Qq.

_Follow'd_] Pope. _Followed_ Qq Ff. _Follow_ Johnson (1771).

Re-enter....] As in Dyce. Enter.... Qq Ff, after line 291. Re-enter....
Capell, after line 291.

[3530] _rage._ Corn. _... whither._] As in Ff. _rage, and will I know
not whether._ Qq.

[3531] _Whither_] F₃ F₄. _Whether_ F₁ F₂.

[3532] _whither_] F₃ F₄. _whether_ F₁ F₂.

[3533] Corn.] Ff. Reg. Q₁ Q₃. Re. Q₂.

_best_] _good_ Qq.

[3534] _bleak_] Q₂. _bleake_ Q₁ Q₃. high Ff.

[3535] _Do ... bush._] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

[3536] _ruffle_] Ff. _russell_ Q₁ Q₃. _russel_ Q₂. _rustle_ Capell.

[3537] _There's_] _There is_ Q₃.

_scarce_] _not_ Qq.

[3538] _to_] _too_ Q₁ F₁ Q₃.

[3539] _wild_] _wil'd_ F₁ F₂.

[3540] _Regan_] _Reg_ Q₂.

_o' the_] _oth'_ F₁ F₂. _o' th'_ F₃ F₄. _ath_ Q₁ Q₃. _at'h_ Q₂.

[Exeunt.] Exeunt omnes. Q₁ Q₃.




ACT III.


SCENE I. _A heath._

     _Storm still. Enter_ KENT _and a_ Gentleman, _meeting_.[3541]

    _Kent._ Who's there, besides foul weather?[3542]

    _Gent._ One minded like the weather, most unquietly.

    _Kent._ I know you. Where's the king?

    _Gent._ Contending with the fretful elements;[3543]
    Bids the wind blow the earth into the sea,                         5
    Or swell the curled waters 'bove the main,[3544]
    That things might change or cease; tears his white hair,[3545]
    Which the impetuous blasts, with eyeless rage,[3545]
    Catch in their fury, and make nothing of;[3545]
    Strives in his little world of man to out-scorn[3545][3546][3547]  10
    The to-and-fro-conflicting wind and rain.[3545][3546][3548]
    This night, wherein the cub-drawn bear would couch,[3545][3549]
    The lion and the belly-pinched wolf[3545][3550]
    Keep their fur dry, unbonneted he runs,[3545]
    And bids what will take all.[3545]

    _Kent._                      But who is with him?                 15

    _Gent._ None but the fool; who labours to out-jest
    His heart-struck injuries.[3551]

    _Kent._                    Sir, I do know you;
    And dare, upon the warrant of my note,[3552]
    Commend a dear thing to you. There is division,[3553]
    Although as yet the face of it be cover'd[3554]                   20
    With mutual cunning, 'twixt Albany and Cornwall;[3555]
    Who have--as who have not, that their great stars[3556][3557]
    Throned and set high?--servants, who seem no less,[3556][3558]
    Which are to France the spies and speculations[3556][3559]
    Intelligent of our state; what hath been seen,[3556][3560]        25
    Either in snuffs and packings of the dukes,[3556]
    Or the hard rein which both of them have borne[3556][3561]
    Against the old kind king, or something deeper,[3556]
    Whereof perchance these are but furnishings,--[3556][3562]
    But true it is, from France there comes a power[3563][3564]       30
    Into this scatter'd kingdom; who already,[3564][3565][3566]
    Wise in our negligence, have secret feet[3564][3565][3567]
    In some of our best ports, and are at point[3564][3565]
    To show their open banner. Now to you:[3564][3565]
    If on my credit you dare build so far[3564][3565]                 35
    To make your speed to Dover, you shall find[3564]
    Some that will thank you, making just report[3564]
    Of how unnatural and bemadding sorrow[3564][3568]
    The king hath cause to plain.[3564][3569]
    I am a gentleman of blood and breeding,[3564][3569]               40
    And from some knowledge and assurance offer[3564][3569][3570]
    This office to you.[3564][3569][3570]

    _Gent._ I will talk further with you.[3571]

    _Kent._                               No, do not.
    For confirmation that I am much more[3572]
    Than my out-wall, open this purse and take                        45
    What it contains. If you shall see Cordelia,--
    As fear not but you shall,--show her this ring,[3573]
    And she will tell you who your fellow is[3574]
    That yet you do not know. Fie on this storm!
    I will go seek the king.

    _Gent._                  Give me your hand:[3575]                 50
    Have you no more to say?[3575]

    _Kent._ Few words, but, to effect, more than all yet;
    That when we have found the king,--in which your pain[3576]
    That way, I'll this,--he that first lights on him[3576]
    Holla the other.                [_Exeunt severally._[3576][3577]  55


SCENE II. _Another part of the heath. Storm still._[3578]

                        _Enter_ LEAR _and_ Fool.

    _Lear._ Blow, winds, and crack your cheeks! rage! blow![3579]
    You cataracts and hurricanoes, spout[3580][3581]
    Till you have drench'd our steeples, drown'd the cocks![3580][3582]
    You sulphurous and thought-executing fires,[3580][3583]
    Vaunt-couriers to oak-cleaving thunderbolts,[3580][3584]           5
    Singe my white head! And thou, all-shaking thunder,[3580][3585]
    Smite flat the thick rotundity o' the world![3580][3586]
    Crack nature's moulds, all germins spill at once[3580][3587]
    That make ingrateful man![3580][3588]

    _Fool._ O nuncle, court holy-water in a dry house is[3589]        10
    better than this rain-water out o' door. Good nuncle, in,[3589][3590]
    and ask thy daughters' blessing: here's a night pities[3589][3591]
    neither wise man nor fool.[3589][3592]

    _Lear._ Rumble thy bellyful! Spit, fire! spout, rain![3593]
    Nor rain, wind, thunder, fire, are my daughters:                  15
    I tax not you, you elements, with unkindness;[3594]
    I never gave you kingdom, call'd you children,[3595]
    You owe me no subscription: then let fall[3596][3597]
    Your horrible pleasure; here I stand, your slave,[3596][3598]
    A poor, infirm, weak and despised old man:[3596]                  20
    But yet I call you servile ministers,[3596]
    That have with two pernicious daughters join'd[3596][3599]
    Your high-engender'd battles 'gainst a head[3596][3600]
    So old and white as this. O! O! 'tis foul![3596][3601]

    _Fool._ He that has a house to put's head in has a good[3602]     25
    head-piece.

                The cod-piece that will house[3603]
                  Before the head has any,[3603]
                The head and he shall louse;[3603]
                  So beggars marry many.[3603]                        30
                The man that makes his toe[3603][3604]
                  What he his heart should make[3603][3605]
                Shall of a corn cry woe,[3603][3606]
                  And turn his sleep to wake.[3603]

    For there was never yet fair woman but she made mouths[3607]      35
    in a glass.

    _Lear._ No, I will be the pattern of all patience;[3608]
    I will say nothing.

                             _Enter_ KENT.

    _Kent._ Who's there?

    _Fool._ Marry, here's grace and a cod-piece; that's a             40
    wise man and a fool.

    _Kent._ Alas, sir, are you here? things that love night[3609][3610]
    Love not such nights as these; the wrathful skies[3609]
    Gallow the very wanderers of the dark,[3609][3611]
    And make them keep their caves: since I was man,[3609][3612]      45
    Such sheets of fire, such bursts of horrid thunder,[3609]
    Such groans of roaring wind and rain, I never[3609][3613]
    Remember to have heard: man's nature cannot carry[3609]
    The affliction nor the fear.[3609]

    _Lear._                      Let the great gods,[3609][3614]
    That keep this dreadful pother o'er our heads,[3609][3615]        50
    Find out their enemies now. Tremble, thou wretch,[3609]
    That hast within thee undivulged crimes,[3609]
    Unwhipp'd of justice: hide thee, thou bloody hand;[3609]
    Thou perjured, and thou simular man of virtue[3609][3616]
    That art incestuous: caitiff, to pieces shake,[3609][3617]        55
    That under covert and convenient seeming[3609][3618]
    Hast practised on man's life: close pent-up guilts,[3609][3619]
    Rive your concealing continents and cry[3609][3620]
    These dreadful summoners grace. I am a man[3609]
    More sinn'd against than sinning.[3621]

    _Kent._                           Alack, bare-headed![3622]       60
    Gracious my lord, hard by here is a hovel;[3622]
    Some friendship will it lend you 'gainst the tempest:[3622]
    Repose you there; while I to this hard house--[3622][3623]
    More harder than the stones whereof 'tis raised;[3622][3624]
    Which even but now, demanding after you,[3622][3625]              65
    Denied me to come in--return, and force[3622]
    Their scanted courtesy.[3622]

    _Lear._                 My wits begin to turn.[3626]
    Come on, my boy: how dost, my boy? art cold?
    I am cold myself. Where is this straw, my fellow?[3627]
    The art of our necessities is strange,[3628]                      70
    That can make vile things precious. Come, your hovel.[3628][3629][3630]
    Poor fool and knave, I have one part in my heart[3628][3630][3631]
    That's sorry yet for thee.[3632]

    _Fool._ [_Singing_] He that has and a little tiny wit,--[3633][3634][3635]
                  With hey, ho, the wind and the rain,--[3634][3636]  75
                Must make content with his fortunes fit,[3634]
                  For the rain it raineth every day.[3634][3637]

    _Lear._ True, my good boy. Come, bring us to this
              hovel.                      [_Exeunt Lear and Kent._[3638]

    _Fool_. This is a brave night to cool a courtezan. I'll[3639][3640][3641]
    speak a prophecy ere I go:[3639][3640][3642]                      80
            When priests are more in word than matter;[3639][3643]
            When brewers mar their malt with water;[3639]
            When nobles are their tailors' tutors;[3639]
            No heretics burn'd, but wenches' suitors;[3639]
            When every case in law is right;[3639]                    85
            No squire in debt, nor no poor knight;[3639][3644]
            When slanders do not live in tongues,[3639][3645]
            Nor cutpurses come not to throngs;[3639][3646]
            When usurers tell their gold i' the field,[3639]
            And bawds and whores do churches build;[3639]             90
            Then shall the realm of Albion[3639][3647]
            Come to great confusion:[3639][3647]
            Then comes the time, who lives to see't,[3639][3648]
            That going shall be used with feet.[3639][3648]
    This prophecy Merlin shall make; for I live before his time.      95

                                                         [_Exit._[3649]


SCENE III. _Gloucester's castle._

                 _Enter_ GLOUCESTER _and_ EDMUND.[3650]

    _Glou._ Alack, alack, Edmund, I like not this unnatural[3651]
    dealing. When I desired their leave that I might pity him,[3651]
    they took from me the use of mine own house; charged[3651][3652]
    me, on pain of their perpetual displeasure, neither to speak[3651][3653]
    of him, entreat for him, nor any way sustain him.[3651][3654]      5

    _Edm._ Most savage and unnatural![3651][3655]

    _Glou._ Go to; say you nothing. There's a division betwixt[3651][3656]
    the dukes, and a worse matter than that: I have received[3651]
    a letter this night; 'tis dangerous to be spoken; I[3651]
    have locked the letter in my closet: these injuries the king[3651]  10
    now bears will be revenged home; there is part of a power[3651][3657]
    already footed: we must incline to the king. I will seek[3651][3658]
    him and privily relieve him: go you, and maintain talk[3651]
    with the duke, that my charity be not of him perceived: if[3651]
    he ask for me, I am ill and gone to bed. Though I die[3651][3659]  15
    for it, as no less is threatened me, the king my old master[3651][3660]
    must be relieved. There is some strange thing toward,[3651][3661]
    Edmund; pray you, be careful.                         [_Exit._[3651]

    _Edm._ This courtesy, forbid thee, shall the duke[3662][3663]
    Instantly know, and of that letter too:[3662]                     20
    This seems a fair deserving, and must draw me[3662][3664]
    That which my father loses; no less than all:[3662][3665]
    The younger rises when the old doth fall.       [_Exit._[3662][3666]


SCENE IV. _The heath. Before a hovel._[3667]

                    _Enter_ LEAR, KENT, _and_ FOOL.

    _Kent_. Here is the place, my lord; good my lord, enter:[3668]
    The tyranny of the open night's too rough[3668][3669]
    For nature to endure.                    [_Storm still._[3668][3670]

    _Lear._               Let me alone.[3671]

    _Kent._ Good my lord, enter here.[3671]

    _Lear._                           Wilt break my heart?[3672]

    _Kent._ I had rather break mine own. Good my lord, enter.[3673]    5

    _Lear._ Thou think'st 'tis much that this contentious storm[3674]
    Invades us to the skin: so 'tis to thee;[3675]
    But where the greater malady is fix'd
    The lesser is scarce felt. Thou'ldst shun a bear,[3676]
    But if thy flight lay toward the raging sea[3677]                 10
    Thou'ldst meet the bear i' the mouth. When the mind's free[3678]
    The body's delicate: the tempest in my mind[3679]
    Doth from my senses take all feeling else
    Save what beats there. Filial ingratitude![3680]
    Is it not as this mouth should tear this hand[3681]               15
    For lifting food to't? But I will punish home.[3682]
    No, I will weep no more. In such a night[3683]
    To shut me out! Pour on; I will endure.[3683]
    In such a night as this! O Regan, Goneril!
    Your old kind father, whose frank heart gave you all,--[3684]     20
    O, that way madness lies; let me shun that;
    No more of that.

    _Kent._          Good my lord, enter here.[3685]

    _Lear._ Prithee, go in thyself; seek thine own ease:[3686]
    This tempest will not give me leave to ponder
    On things would hurt me more. But I'll go in.                     25
    [_To the Fool_] In, boy; go first. You houseless
        poverty,--[3687][3688][3689]
    Nay, get thee in. I'll pray, and then I'll sleep.

                                           [_Fool goes in._[3688][3690]

    Poor naked wretches, wheresoe'er you are,
    That bide the pelting of this pitiless storm,[3691]
    How shall your houseless heads and unfed sides,                   30
    Your loop'd and window'd raggedness, defend you[3692]
    From seasons such as these? O, I have ta'en
    Too little care of this! Take physic, pomp;
    Expose thyself to feel what wretches feel,
    That thou mayst shake the superflux to them                       35
    And show the heavens more just.[3693]

    _Edg._ [_Within_] Fathom and half, fathom and half![3694][3695]
    Poor Tom!           [_The Fool runs out from the hovel._[3695][3696]

    _Fool._ Come not in here, nuncle, here's a spirit. Help[3697]
    me, help me![3697]                                                40

    _Kent._ Give me thy hand. Who's there?[3698]

    _Fool._ A spirit, a spirit: he says his name's poor Tom.[3699]

    _Kent._ What art thou that dost grumble there i' the straw?[3700][3701]
    Come forth.[3700]

              _Enter_ EDGAR _disguised as a madman_.[3702]

    _Edg._ Away! the foul fiend follows me! 'Through
        the[3703][3704][3705][3706]                                   45
    sharp hawthorn blows the cold wind.' Hum! go to thy[3704][3706][3707]
    cold bed and warm thee.[3704][3708]

    _Lear._ Hast thou given all to thy two daughters? and[3709][3710]
    art thou come to this?[3709]

    _Edg._ Who gives any thing to poor Tom? whom the                  50
    foul fiend hath led through fire and through flame, through[3711]
    ford and whirlpool, o'er bog and quagmire; that hath laid[3712]
    knives under his pillow and halters in his pew; set ratsbane[3713]
    by his porridge; made him proud of heart, to ride on[3714]
    a bay trotting-horse over four-inched bridges, to course his[3715]  55
    own shadow for a traitor. Bless thy five wits! Tom's[3716]
    a-cold. O, do de, do de, do de. Bless thee from whirlwinds,[3716][3717]
    star-blasting, and taking! Do poor Tom some[3718]
    charity, whom the foul fiend vexes. There could I have him
    now, and there, and there again, and there. [_Storm still._[3719]  60

    _Lear._ What, have his daughters brought him to this pass?[3720]
    Couldst thou save nothing? Didst thou give them all?[3721]

    _Fool._ Nay, he reserved a blanket, else we had been all
    shamed.[3722]

    _Lear._ Now, all the plagues that in the pendulous air            65
    Hang fated o'er men's faults light on thy daughters![3723]

    _Kent._ He hath no daughters, sir.

    _Lear._ Death, traitor! nothing could have subdued nature
    To such a lowness but his unkind daughters.
    Is it the fashion that discarded fathers                          70
    Should have thus little mercy on their flesh?
    Judicious punishment! 'twas this flesh begot[3724]
    Those pelican daughters.[3724][3725]

    _Edg._ Pillicock sat on Pillicock-hill:[3726][3727]
    Halloo, halloo, loo, loo![3726][3728]                             75

    _Fool._ This cold night will turn us all to fools and
    madmen.

    _Edg._ Take heed o' the foul fiend: obey thy parents;[3729]
    keep thy word justly; swear not; commit not with man's[3730]
    sworn spouse; set not thy sweet heart on proud array.[3731]       80
    Tom's a-cold.

    _Lear._ What hast thou been?

    _Edg._ A serving-man, proud in heart and mind; that
    curled my hair; wore gloves in my cap; served the lust of[3732]
    my mistress' heart and did the act of darkness with her;[3733]    85
    swore as many oaths as I spake words and broke them in
    the sweet face of heaven: one that slept in the contriving of[3734]
    lust and waked to do it: wine loved I deeply, dice dearly,[3735]
    and in woman out-paramoured the Turk: false of heart,
    light of ear, bloody of hand; hog in sloth, fox in stealth,[3736]  90
    wolf in greediness, dog in madness, lion in prey. Let not
    the creaking of shoes nor the rustling of silks betray thy[3737]
    poor heart to woman: keep thy foot out of brothels, thy[3738]
    hand out of plackets, thy pen from lenders' books, and defy[3739]
    the foul fiend.                                                   95

        'Still through the hawthorn blows the cold wind.'[3740]
        Says suum, mun, ha, no, nonny.[3741]
        Dolphin my boy, my boy, sessa! let him trot by.

                                                   [_Storm still._[3742]

    _Lear._ Why, thou wert better in thy grave than to answer[3743][3744]
    with thy uncovered body this extremity of the skies.[3744]       100
    Is man no more than this? Consider him well. Thou owest[3744][3745]
    the worm no silk, the beast no hide, the sheep no wool, the[3744]
    cat no perfume. Ha! here's three on's are sophisticated.[3744][3746]
    Thou art the thing itself: unaccommodated man is no more[3744]
    but such a poor, bare, forked animal as thou art. Off, off,[3744]  105
    you lendings! come, unbutton here.[3744]

                                       [_Tearing off his clothes._[3747]

    _Fool._ Prithee, nuncle, be contented; 'tis a naughty night[3748]
    to swim in. Now a little fire in a wild field were like an[3749]
    old lecher's heart, a small spark, all the rest on's body cold.[3750]
    Look, here comes a walking fire.                                 110

               _Enter_ GLOUCESTER, _with a torch_.[3751]

    _Edg._ This is the foul fiend Flibbertigibbet: he begins at[3752]
    curfew and walks till the first cock; he gives the web and[3753][3754]
    the pin, squints the eye and makes the hare-lip; mildews[3754][3755]
    the white wheat and hurts the poor creature of earth.[3756]

            Saint Withold footed thrice the 'old;[3757][3758]        115
            He met the night-mare and her nine-fold;[3757][3759]
                  Bid her alight,[3757][3760]
                  And her troth plight,[3757][3761]
            And aroint thee, witch, aroint thee![3757][3762]

    _Kent._ How fares your grace?                                    120

    _Lear._ What's he?[3763]

    _Kent._ Who's there? What is't you seek?[3764]

    _Glou._ What are you there? Your names?

    _Edg._ Poor Tom, that eats the swimming frog, the toad,
    the tadpole, the wall-newt and the water; that in the fury[3765]  125
    of his heart, when the foul fiend rages, eats cow-dung for
    sallets; swallows the old rat and the ditch-dog; drinks the[3766]
    green mantle of the standing pool; who is whipped from
    tithing to tithing, and stock-punished, and imprisoned;[3767]
    who hath had three suits to his back, six shirts to his body,[3768]  130
    horse to ride and weapon to wear;[3769]

            But mice and rats and such small deer[3770]
            Have been Tom's food for seven long year.[3771]

    Beware my follower. Peace, Smulkin; peace, thou fiend![3772]

    _Glou._ What, hath your grace no better company?                 135

    _Edg._ The prince of darkness is a gentleman: Modo[3773][3774]
    he's call'd, and Mahu.[3773][3775]

    _Glou._ Our flesh and blood is grown so vile, my lord,[3776][3777]
    That it doth hate what gets it.[3776][3778]

    _Edg._ Poor Tom's a-cold.[3779][3780]                            140

    _Glou._ Go in with me: my duty cannot suffer[3781]
    To obey in all your daughters' hard commands:[3781]
    Though their injunction be to bar my doors[3781][3782]
    And let this tyrannous night take hold upon you,[3781]
    Yet have I ventured to come seek you out[3781][3783]             145
    And bring you where both fire and food is ready.[3781][3784]

    _Lear._ First let me talk with this philosopher.
    What is the cause of thunder?

    _Kent._ Good my lord, take his offer; go into the house.[3785]

    _Lear._ I'll talk a word with this same learned Theban.[3786][3787]  150
    What is your study?[3786]

    _Edg._ How to prevent the fiend and to kill vermin.

    _Lear._ Let me ask you one word in private.[3788]

    _Kent._ Importune him once more to go, my lord;[3789][3790]
    His wits begin to unsettle.[3789]

    _Glou._            Canst thou blame him?  [_Storm still._[3791]  155
    His daughters seek his death: ah, that good Kent![3792]
    He said it would be thus, poor banish'd man!
    Thou say'st the king grows mad; I'll tell thee, friend,[3793]
    I am almost mad myself: I had a son,[3794]
    Now outlaw'd from my blood; he sought my life,[3795]             160
    But lately, very late: I loved him, friend,
    No father his son dearer: truth to tell thee,[3796]
    The grief hath crazed my wits. What a night's this![3797]
    I do beseech your grace,--[3798]

    _Lear._                    O, cry you mercy, sir.[3799]
    Noble philosopher, your company.[3799]                           165

    _Edg._ Tom's a-cold.[3780]

    _Glou._ In, fellow, there, into the hovel: keep thee warm.[3800]

    _Lear._ Come, let's in all.

    _Kent._                     This way, my lord.

    _Lear._                                        With him;[3801]
    I will keep still with my philosopher.[3801]

    _Kent._ Good my lord, soothe him; let him take the fellow.[3802]  170

    _Glou._ Take him you on.

    _Kent._ Sirrah, come on; go along with us.[3803]

    _Lear._ Come, good Athenian.[3804]

    _Glou._ No words, no words: hush.[3804]

    _Edg._   Child Rowland to the dark tower came:[3805]             175
        His word was still 'Fie, foh, and fum,
          I smell the blood of a British man.'          [_Exeunt._[3806]


SCENE V. _Gloucester's castle._

                  _Enter_ CORNWALL _and_ EDMUND.[3807]

    _Corn._ I will have my revenge ere I depart his house.[3808]

    _Edm._ How, my lord, I may be censured, that nature
    thus gives way to loyalty, something fears me to think of.

    _Corn._ I now perceive, it was not altogether your brother's
    evil disposition made him seek his death, but a provoking[3809]    5
    merit, set a-work by a reproveable badness in himself.[3809][3810]

    _Edm._ How malicious is my fortune, that I must repent
    to be just! This is the letter he spoke of, which approves[3811]
    him an intelligent party to the advantages of France. O[3812]
    heavens! that this treason were not, or not I the detector![3813]  10

    _Corn._ Go with me to the duchess.

    _Edm._ If the matter of this paper be certain, you have
    mighty business in hand.

    _Corn._ True or false, it hath made thee earl of Gloucester.
    Seek out where thy father is, that he may be ready for our        15
    apprehension.

    _Edm._ [_Aside_] If I find him comforting the king, it will[3814]
    stuff his suspicion more fully.--I will persever in my course[3815]
    of loyalty, though the conflict be sore between that and my
    blood.                                                            20

    _Corn._ I will lay trust upon thee, and thou shalt find a
    dearer father in my love.                           [_Exeunt._[3816]


SCENE VI. _A chamber in a farmhouse adjoining the castle._

        _Enter_ GLOUCESTER, LEAR, KENT, Fool, _and_ EDGAR.[3817]

    _Glou._ Here is better than the open air; take it thankfully.
    I will piece out the comfort with what addition I
    can: I will not be long from you.

    _Kent._ All the power of his wits have given way to his[3818]
    impatience: the gods reward your kindness!                         5

                                               [_Exit Gloucester._[3819]

    _Edg._ Frateretto calls me, and tells me Nero is an[3820]
    angler in the lake of darkness. Pray, innocent, and beware[3821]
    the foul fiend.

    _Fool._ Prithee, nuncle, tell me whether a madman be a[3822]
    gentleman or a yeoman.[3823]                                      10

    _Lear._ A king, a king!

    _Fool._ No, he's a yeoman that has a gentleman to his[3824]
    son, for he's a mad yeoman that sees his son a gentleman[3824][3825]
    before him.[3824]

    _Lear._ To have a thousand with red burning spits[3824][3826]     15
    Come hissing in upon 'em,--[3826][3827]

    _Edg._ The foul fiend bites my back.[3828]

    _Fool._ He's mad that trusts in the tameness of a wolf,[3828][3829]
    a horse's health, a boy's love, or a whore's oath.[3828][3830]

    _Lear._ It shall be done; I will arraign them straight.[3828][3831]  20
    [_To Edgar_] Come, sit thou here, most learned justicer;[3828][3832]
    [_To the Fool_] Thou, sapient sir, sit here. Now, you she foxes![3828][3833]

    _Edg._ Look, where he stands and glares!
        Wantest[3828][3834][3835][3836][3837]
    thou eyes at trial, madam?[3828][3834][3835][3837][3838]
          Come o'er the bourn, Bessy, to me.[3828][3834][3835][3839]  25

    _Fool._    Her boat hath a leak,[3828][3834][3840][3841]
            And she must not speak[3828][3834][3841]
          Why she dares not come over to thee.[3828][3834]

    _Edg._ The foul fiend haunts poor Tom in the voice of[3828]
    a nightingale. Hopdance cries in Tom's belly for two white[3828]  30
    herring. Croak not, black angel; I have no food for thee.[3828][3842]

    _Kent._ How do you, sir? Stand you not so amazed:[3828][3843]
    Will you lie down and rest upon the cushions?[3828][3843][3844]

    _Lear._ I'll see their trial first. Bring in the evidence.[3828][3845][3846]
    [_To Edgar_] Thou robed man of justice take thy place;[3828][3845][3847]  35
    [_To the Fool_] And thou, his yoke-fellow of equity,[3828][3845][3848]
    Bench by his side. [_To Kent_] You are o' the commission;[3828][3845][3849]
    Sit you too.[3828][3845]

    _Edg._ Let us deal justly.[3828][3845][3850]
        Sleepest or wakest thou, jolly
              shepherd?[3828][3845][3850][3851][3852]                 40
          Thy sheep be in the corn;[3828][3845][3850][3852]
        And for one blast of thy minikin mouth,[3828][3845][3850][3852]
          Thy sheep shall take no harm.[3828][3845][3850][3852]
    Pur! the cat is gray.[3828][3845][3850]

    _Lear._ Arraign her first; 'tis Goneril. I here take
        my[3828][3845][3850][3853]                                    45
    oath before this honourable assembly, she kicked the
        poor[3828][3845][3853][3854]
    king her father.[3828][3845][3853]

    _Fool._ Come hither, mistress. Is your name Goneril?[3828]

    _Lear._ She cannot deny it.[3828][3855]

    _Fool._ Cry you mercy, I took you for a joint-stool.[3828][3856]  50

    _Lear._ And here's another, whose warp'd looks proclaim[3828][3857]
    What store her heart is made on. Stop her there![3828][3857][3858]
    Arms, arms, sword, fire! Corruption in the place![3828][3859]
    False justicer, why hast thou let her 'scape?[3828]

    _Edg._ Bless thy five wits!                                       55

    _Kent._ O pity! Sir, where is the patience now,
    That you so oft have boasted to retain?[3860]

    _Edg._ [_Aside_] My tears begin to take his part so much,[3861]
    They'll mar my counterfeiting.[3862]

    _Lear._ The little dogs and all,                                  60
    Tray, Blanch, and Sweet-heart, see, they bark at me.

    _Edg._ Tom will throw his head at them. Avaunt, you[3863]
    curs![3863]

              Be thy mouth or black or white,[3863]
              Tooth that poisons if it bite;[3863]                    65
              Mastiff, greyhound, mongrel grim,[3863][3864]
              Hound or spaniel, brach or lym,[3863][3864][3865]
              Or bobtail tike or trundle-tail,[3863][3866]
              Tom will make them weep and wail:[3863][3867]
              For, with throwing thus my head,[3863]                  70
              Dogs leap the hatch, and all are fled.[3863][3868]

    Do de, de, de. Sessa! Come, march to wakes and fairs[3869][3870]
    and market-towns. Poor Tom, thy horn is dry.[3869][3871]

    _Lear._ Then let them anatomize Regan; see what[3872][3873]
    breeds about her heart. Is there any cause in nature that[3872][3874]  75
    makes these hard hearts? [_To Edgar_] You, sir, I entertain[3872][3875]
    for one of my hundred; only I do not like the fashion[3872][3876]
    of your garments. You will say they are Persian attire;[3872][3877]
    but let them be changed.[3872]

    _Kent._ Now, good my lord, lie here and rest awhile.[3878]        80

    _Lear._ Make no noise, make no noise; draw the curtains:[3879]
    so, so, so. We'll go to supper i' the morning. So,[3879][3880]
    so, so.

    _Fool._ And I'll go to bed at noon.

                      _Re-enter_ GLOUCESTER.[3881]

    _Glou._ Come hither, friend: where is the king my master?[3882]   85

    _Kent._ Here, sir; but trouble him not: his wits are gone.

    _Glou._ Good friend, I prithee, take him in thy arms;
    I have o'erheard a plot of death upon him:
    There is a litter ready; lay him in't,[3883][3884]
    And drive toward Dover, friend, where thou shalt meet[3883][3885]  90
    Both welcome and protection. Take up thy master:[3883]
    If thou shouldst dally half an hour, his life,[3883][3886]
    With thine and all that offer to defend him,[3883]
    Stand in assured loss. Take up, take up,[3883][3887]
    And follow me, that will to some provision[3883]                  95
    Give thee quick conduct.

    _Kent._                  Oppressed nature sleeps.[3888][3889]
    This rest might yet have balm'd thy broken sinews,[3888][3890]
    Which, if convenience will not allow,[3888][3891][3892]
    Stand in hard cure.  [_To the Fool_]  Come, help to bear thy
        master;[3888][3891][3893]
    Thou must not stay behind.[3888][3891]

    _Glou._                    Come, come, away.                     100

                                          [_Exeunt all but Edgar._[3894]

    _Edg._ When we our betters see bearing our woes,[3895][3896]
    We scarcely think our miseries our foes.[3895][3896]
    Who alone suffers suffers most i' the mind,[3895][3897]
    Leaving free things and happy shows behind:[3895]
    But then the mind much sufferance doth o'erskip,[3895][3898]     105
    When grief hath mates, and bearing fellowship.[3895]
    How light and portable my pain seems now,[3895]
    When that which makes me bend makes the king bow,[3895]
    He childed as I father'd! Tom, away![3895][3899]
    Mark the high noises, and thyself bewray[3895][3900]             110
    When false opinion, whose wrong thought defiles thee,[3895][3901]
    In thy just proof repeals and reconciles thee.[3895]
    What will hap more to-night, safe 'scape the king![3895][3902]
    Lurk, lurk.                                     [_Exit._[3895][3903]


SCENE VII. _Gloucester's castle._

    _Enter_ CORNWALL, REGAN, GONERIL, EDMUND, _and_ Servants.[3904]

    _Corn._ Post speedily to my lord your husband; show[3905]
    him this letter: the army of France is landed. Seek out the[3905]
    traitor Gloucester.      [_Exeunt some of the Servants._[3905][3906]

    _Reg._ Hang him instantly.

    _Gon._ Pluck out his eyes.                                         5

    _Corn._ Leave him to my displeasure. Edmund, keep[3907][3908]
    you our sister company: the revenges we are bound to take[3907][3909]
    upon your traitorous father are not fit for your beholding.[3907]
    Advise the duke, where you are going, to a most festinate[3907][3910]
    preparation: we are bound to the like. Our posts shall
        be[3907][3911][3912]                                          10
    swift and intelligent betwixt us. Farewell, dear sister:[3911][3913]
    farewell, my lord of Gloucester.[3911]

                         _Enter_ OSWALD.[3914]

    How now! where's the king?

    _Osw._ My lord of Gloucester hath convey'd him hence:
    Some five or six and thirty of his knights,[3915]                 15
    Hot questrists after him, met him at gate;[3915][3916]
    Who, with some other of the lords dependants,[3915][3917]
    Are gone with him toward Dover; where they boast[3915][3918]
    To have well-armed friends.[3915]

    _Corn._                     Get horses for your mistress.

    _Gon._ Farewell, sweet lord, and sister.                          20

    _Corn._ Edmund, farewell.

                           [_Exeunt Goneril, Edmund, and Oswald._[3919]

                              Go seek the traitor Gloucester.
    Pinion him like a thief, bring him before us.

                                        [_Exeunt other Servants._[3920]

    Though well we may not pass upon his life[3921]
    Without the form of justice, yet our power
    Shall do a courtesy to our wrath, which men[3922][3923]           25
    May blame but not control. Who's there? the traitor?[3922]

        _Enter_ GLOUCESTER, _brought in by two or three_.[3924]

    _Reg._ Ingrateful fox! 'tis he.

    _Corn._ Bind fast his corky arms.

    _Glou._ What mean your graces? Good my friends, consider[3925][3926]
    You are my guests: do me no foul play, friends.[3925]             30

    _Corn._ Bind him, I say.                 [_Servants bind him._[3927]

    _Reg._                Hard, hard. O filthy traitor!

    _Glou._ Unmerciful lady as you are, I'm none.[3928]

    _Corn._ To this chair bind him. Villain, thou shalt find--

                                       [_Regan plucks his beard._[3929]

    _Glou._ By the kind gods, 'tis most ignobly done[3930]
    To pluck me by the beard.[3930]                                   35

    _Reg._ So white, and such a traitor!

    _Glou._                              Naughty lady,[3931]
    These hairs which thou dost ravish from my chin[3931]
    Will quicken and accuse thee: I am your host:[3932]
    With robbers' hands my hospitable favours[3933]
    You should not ruffle thus. What will you do?[3934]               40

    _Corn._ Come, sir, what letters had you late from France?[3935]

    _Reg._ Be simple answerer, for we know the truth.[3936]

    _Corn._ And what confederacy have you with the traitors[3937]
    Late footed in the kingdom?[3937][3938]

    _Reg._ To whose hands have you sent the lunatic king?[3939][3940]  45
    Speak.[3939]

    _Glou._ I have a letter guessingly set down,[3941]
    Which came from one that's of a neutral heart
    And not from one opposed.

    _Corn._                   Cunning.

    _Reg._                             And false.

    _Corn._ Where hast thou sent the king?

    _Glou._                                To Dover.[3942]            50

    _Reg._ Wherefore to Dover? Wast thou not charged at peril--[3943]

    _Corn._ Wherefore to Dover? Let him first answer that.[3944]

    _Glou._ I am tied to the stake, and I must stand the course.[3945]

    _Reg._ Wherefore to Dover, sir?[3946]

    _Glou._ Because I would not see thy cruel nails                   55
    Pluck out his poor old eyes, nor thy fierce sister
    In his anointed flesh stick boarish fangs.[3947]
    The sea, with such a storm as his bare head[3948]
    In hell-black night endured, would have buoy'd up,[3949]
    And quench'd the stelled fires:[3950][3951]                       60
    Yet, poor old heart, he holp the heavens to rain.[3950][3952]
    If wolves had at thy gate howl'd that stern time,[3953]
    Thou shouldst have said, 'Good porter, turn the key,'[3954]
    All cruels else subscribed: but I shall see[3955]
    The winged vengeance overtake such children.                      65

    _Corn._ See't shalt thou never. Fellows, hold the chair.
    Upon these eyes of thine I'll set my foot.[3956]

    _Glou._ He that will think to live till he be old,[3957]
    Give me some help! O cruel! O you gods![3958]

    _Reg._ One side will mock another; the other too.[3959]           70

    _Corn._ If you see vengeance--[3960]

    _First Serv._                  Hold your hand, my lord:
    I have served you ever since I was a child;[3961]
    But better service have I never done you[3962]
    Than now to bid you hold.[3962]

    _Reg._                    How now, you dog!

    _First Serv._ If you did wear a beard upon your chin,[3963]       75
    I'ld shake it on this quarrel. What do you mean?[3963][3964]

    _Corn._ My villain!                    [_They draw and fight._[3965]

    _First Serv._ Nay, then, come on, and take the chance of anger.[3966]

    _Reg._ Give me thy sword. A peasant stand up thus!

                         [_Takes a sword and runs at him behind._[3967]

    _First Serv._ O, I am slain! My lord, you have one
              eye left[3968][3969]                                    80
    To see some mischief on him. O!                 [_Dies._[3968][3970]

    _Corn._ Lest it see more, prevent it. Out, vile jelly![3971]
    Where is thy lustre now?[3972]

    _Glou._ All dark and comfortless. Where's my son Edmund?[3973]
    Edmund, enkindle all the sparks of nature,[3974][3975]            85
    To quit this horrid act.[3974]

    _Reg._                   Out, treacherous villain![3976][3977]
    Thou call'st on him that hates thee: it was he[3976]
    That made the overture of thy treasons to us;[3976][3978]
    Who is too good to pity thee.[3976]

    _Glou._ O my follies! Then Edgar was abused.[3979][3980]          90
    Kind gods, forgive me that, and prosper him![3979]

    _Reg._ Go thrust him out at gates, and let him smell[3979][3981][3982]
    His way to Dover. [_Exit one with Gloucester._] How is't,
        my lord? how look you?[3979][3981][3983]

    _Corn._ I have received a hurt: follow me, lady.
    Turn out that eyeless villain: throw this slave[3984]             95
    Upon the dunghill. Regan, I bleed apace:[3984][3985]
    Untimely comes this hurt: give me your arm.

                            [_Exit Cornwall, led by Regan._[3984][3986]

    _Sec. Serv._ I'll never care what wickedness I do,[3987][3988]
    If this man come to good.[3987]

    _Third Serv._             If she live long,[3987][3989][3990]
    And in the end meet the old course of death,[3987][3990]         100
    Women will all turn monsters.[3987][3990]

    _Sec. Serv._ Let's follow the old earl, and get the Bedlam[3987][3991]
    To lead him where he would: his roguish madness[3987][3992]
    Allows itself to any thing.[3987]

    _Third Serv._ Go thou: I'll fetch some flax and whites
        of eggs[3987][3993][3994]                                    105
    To apply to his bleeding face. Now, heaven help him!

                                 [_Exeunt severally._[3987][3994][3995]

FOOTNOTES:

[3541] A heath.] Rowe.

Storm still.] Ff. om. Qq. A Storm is heard, with Thunder and Lightning.
Rowe.

meeting.] Capell. at severall doores. Qq. severally. Ff.

[3542] _Who's there_] Ff. _What's heere_ Q₁. _Whats here_ Q₂. _What's
heare_ Q₃.

_besides_] _beside_ Qq.

[3543] _elements_] _element_ Qq.

[3544] _main_] _moon_ Jennens.

[3545] _tears ... all._] Qq. Omitted in Ff.

[3546] _Strives ... rain._] Omitted by Pope.

[3547] _out-scorn_] _out-storm_ Steevens conj.

[3548] _to-and-fro-conflicting_] Hyphenated by Capell.

[3549] _wherein_] _in which_ Pope.

[3550] _belly-pinched_] Hyphened by Pope.

[3551] _heart-struck_] Rowe. _heart strooke_ Qq. _heart-strooke_ F₁ F₂.
_heart-strook_ F₃ F₄.

[3552] _note_] _arte_ Q₁ Q₂. _art_ Q₃.

[3553] _Commend_] _Commended_ Q₃.

_There is_] _There's_ Pope.

[3554] _be_] Qq. _is_ Ff.

[3555] _cunning_] _craft_ Pope.

[3556] _Who have ... furnishings,--_] Ff. Omitted in Qq. Put in the
margin by Pope.

[3557] _that_] _whom_ Rowe (ed. 2).

_stars_] _Stars have_ Keightley.

[3558] _Throned_] _Thron'd_ Ff. _Throne_ Theobald (ed. 2).

_high?--_] _high.)_ Rowe (ed. 2). _high;_ Ff. _high,_ Rowe (ed. 1).

[3559] _speculations_] _speculators_ Singer, ed. 2 (Johnson conj.)
_spectators_ Collier (Collier MS.)

[3560] _state;_] _state._ Lloyd conj.

_hath_] _have_ Pope (ed. 2), in margin.

[3561] _have_] F₂ F₃ F₄. _hath_ F₁.

[3562] _furnishings,--_] _furnishings--_ Rowe. _furnishings._ Ff.
_flourishings._ Collier MS.

[3563] _But_] _And_ Hanmer.

[3564] _But ... you._] Qq. Omitted in Ff.

[3565] _Into ... far_] Divided as in Pope. Four lines, ending
_negligence ... ports, ... banner ... farre,_ in Qq.

[3566] _scatter'd_] _scatterd_ Q₁ Q₃. _scattered_ Q₂. _shatter'd_
Hanmer. _scathed_ Warburton. _satured_ Becket conj.

[3567] _feet_] Q₂. _fee_ Q₁. _see_ Q₃. _sea_ Pope. _seize_ Warburton.
_foot_ Capell.

[3568] _bemadding_] _madding_ Pope.

[3569] _The ... you._] Three lines, ending _gentleman, ... knowledge
and ... you,_ in Capell.

[3570] _And ... you._] Divided as in Steevens. The first line ends
_assurance,_ in Qq.

_assurance, ... you._] _assurance of you, Offer this office._ Pope.
_Assurance of you, offer this office to you._ Capell.

[3571] _I will_] _Ill_ Pope.

_further_] Ff Q₃. _farther_ Q₁ Q₂.

[3572] _I am_] _I_ Qq.

[3573] _fear_] F₃ F₄. _feare_ Q₂ F₁ F₂. _doubt_ Q₁ Q₃.

_this_] _that_ Rowe.

[3574] _your_] Qq. _that_ Ff. _this_ Rowe.

[3575] _Give ... say?_] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

[3576] _That ... other._] See note (XIII).

[3577] _Holla_] F₁ F₂ F₃. _hollow_ Qq. _Hollow_ F₄. _Halloo_ Warburton.

[Exeunt severally.] Theobald. Exeunt. Qq Ff.

[3578] SCENE II.] Scena secunda. Ff. Rowe and Theobald continue the
Scene.

Another part....] Capell.

Storm still.] Ff. Omitted in Qq. Storm continues. Steevens (1793).

[3579] _winds_] F₃ F₄. _windes_ F₁ F₂. _winde_ Qq.

_crack_] _crake_ Q₃.

_rage! blow!_] _blow; rage, and blow!_ Capell conj. _storm! bellow!
rage!_ Seymour conj.

[3580] _You ... man!_] Divided as in Ff. Eight lines, ending
_drencht ... and ... to ... head, ... flat ... natures ... make ...
man,_ in Qq.

[3581] _You_] See note (XIV).

_cataracts_] Ff. _carterickes_ Q₁. _caterickes_ Q₂. cartericks Q₃.

_hurricanoes_] _Hurricano's_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _Hyrricano's_ F₁. _Hircanios_ Q₁
Q₂. _Hercantos_ Q₃.

[3582] _our_] Ff. _The_ Qq.

_drown'd_] Q₂. _drownd_ Q₁ Q₃. _drown_ F₁ F₃ F₄. _drowne_ F₂.

[3583] _thought-executing_] Ff. _thought executing_ Qq.

[3584] _Vaunt-couriers_] Pope. _vaunt-currers_ Qq. _Vaunt-curriors_ Ff.
_Vant-couriers_ Capell.

_to_] Qq. _of_ Ff.

[3585] _Singe_] Q₂. _sing_ Q₁ Q₃. _sindge_ Ff.

[3586] _Smite_] _smite_ Qq. _Strike_ Ff.

_o' the_] _o' th'_ Ff. _of the_ Qq.

[3587] _Crack_] _Crake_ Q₃.

_moulds_] Ff. _Mold_ Qq.

_germins_] Theobald. _Germains_ Qq. _germaines_ F₁ F₂. _germanes_ F₃ F₄.

[3588] _make_] Qq. _makes_ Ff.

_ingrateful_] _Ingrate full_ Q₃.

[3589] _O nuncle ... fool._] Prose in Ff. Four lines in Qq.

[3590] _this rain-water_] _the rain-water_ F₃ F₄. _the rain-waters_
Pope (ed. 2).

_o'door_] F₃ F₄. _o'doore_ F₁ F₂. _a doore_ Qq.

[3591] _and_] Qq. om. Ff.

_pities_] _that pities_ Pope.

[3592] _wise man nor fool_] _wise man nor foole_ Qq. _wisemen, nor
fooles_ F₁ F₂. _wise-men, nor fools_ F₃ F₄.

[3593] _bellyful_] _bellyfull_ Malone. _belly full_ Qq Ff.

_Spit, fire! spout, rain!_] Capell. _spit fire, spout raine,_ Qq Ff
(_spowt_ F₁ F₂. _rain_ F₃ F₄).

[3594] _tax_] F₃ F₄. _taxe_ F₁ F₂. _taske_ Qq.

[3595] _kingdom_] _kingdoms_ Johnson.

[3596] _You owe ... foul!_] As in Ff. Six lines, ending _horrible ...
and ... servile ... joyn'd ... white ... foule,_ in Qq.

[3597] _subscription_] _submission_ Pope.

_then_] Ff. _why then_ Qq.

[3598] _stand, your slave_] _stand your brave_ Warburton.

[3599] _have ... join'd_] _have ... joyn'd_ Qq. _will ... joyne_ Ff
(_join_ F₃ F₄).

[3600] _high-engender'd_] Hyphened in Ff. _high engendered_ Q₁.

_battles_] F₄. _battailes_ F₁ F₂. _battels_ F₃. _battell_ Q₁ Q₃.
_battel_ Q₂.

[3601] _O! O!_] _Oh! Oh!_ Theobald. _O, ho!_ Ff. _O_ Qq.

[3602] _put's_] _put his_ Qq. _puts_ F₂.

[3603] _The ... wake._] As in Johnson. Four lines in Ff. Prose in Qq.

[3604] _The man_] _That man_ F₃ F₄.

[3605] _heart_] _head_ Eccles conj.

[3606] _Shall of_] Ff. _shall have_ Qq.

[3607] _but_] _hut_ Q₂ (Dev.)

[3608] SCENE III. Pope.

[Sitting down. Jennens.

Enter Kent.] As in Q₁ Q₂. After _patience,_ line 37, in Qq. After
_glass,_ line 36, in Ff.

[3609] _Alas ... sinning._] As in Ff. Twenty lines, ending _heere?...
these; ... of the ... caves, ... fire, ... grones of ...
remember ... carry ... force ... dreadfull ... now, ... thee ...
justice, ... perjur'd, and ... incestious, ... covert ... life, ...
centers, ... grace, ... sinning,_ in Qq.

[3610] _are you_] Ff. _sit you_ Qq.

[3611] _Gallow the_] _gallow, the_ Q₁ Q₂. _Gally the_ Jennens.

_wanderers_] Ff. _wanderer_ Qq.

[3612] _make_] Ff. _makes_ Qq.

[3613] _never_] Ff. _nere_ Q₁ Q₃. _ne're_ Q₂.

[3614] _fear_] F₃ F₄. _feare_ F₁ F₂. _force_ Qq.

[3615] _pother_] Johnson. _Powther_ Q₂. _Thundring_ Q₁ Q₃. _pudder_ Ff.

[3616] _perjured_] _perjure_ Theobald.

_simular_] _simulier_ Q₃. _simuler_ Collier conj.

_man_] Qq om. Ff.

[3617] _incestuous_] Ff. _incestious_ Qq.

_to pieces shake_] F₃ F₄. _to peeces shake_ F₁ F₂. _in peeces shake_
Qq. _shake to pieces_ Pope.

[3618] _covert and convenient_] _cover of convivial_ Warburton.

[3619] _Hast_] Qq. _Ha's_ F₁. _Has_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[3620] _concealing continents_] Ff. _concealed centers_ Qq.

_cry_] _ask_ Pope.

[3621] _than_] F₄. _then_ F₁ F₂ F₃ _their_ Qq.

[3622] _Alack ... courtesy._] As in Ff. Prose in Qq.

[3623] _while_] Ff. _whilst_ Qq.

[3624] _harder ... stones_] Ff. _hard then is the stone_ Qq.

[3625] _you_] Ff. _me_ Qq.

[3626] _wits begin_] Ff. _wit begins_ Qq.

[3627] _I am_] _I'm Pope._

_this_] _the_ Theobald.

[3628] _The art ... heart._] Arranged as in Ff. Three lines, ending
_can ... poore, ... heart_, in Qq.

[3629] _That_] Qq. _And_ Ff.

_vile_] Pope. _vilde_ Q₁ F₁ F₂ Q₃. _vild_ Q₂ F₃ F₄.

[3630] _your hovel. Poor fool_] _your hovel; Poore foole,_ Ff. _you
hovell poore, Foole_ Qq.

[3631] _I have one part in_] Ff. _I have one part of_ Qq. _I've one
thing in_ Pope. _I've one string in_ Hanmer. _I've one part in_ Johnson.

[3632] _That's sorry_] Ff (_Thats_ F₂). _That sorrowes_ Qq.

[3633] [Singing] Sings. Capell. om. Qq Ff.

[3634] _He ... day._] As in Ff. Prose in Qq.

[3635] _and_] Ff. om. Qq. _an_ Theobald.

_little tiny_] _little tynie_ Pope. _little tine_ Qq. _little-tyne_ F₁
F₂ F₃. _little tyne_ F₄.

[3636] _hey, ho,_] _hey ho_ Qq. _heigh-ho._ F₁. _height-ho_ F₂ F₃ F₄.
_a heigh, ho,_ Capell conj. MS.

_rain_] _rain in his way_ Johnson conj.

[3637] _For_] Qq. _Though_ Ff.

[3638] my good] Qq. om. Ff.

_hovel._] _hovell?_ Q₂.

[Exeunt....] Capell. Exit. Ff. om. Qq.

[3639] Fool. _This ... time._ [Exit.] Ff. Omitted in Qq.

[3640] _This ... go:_] Prose in Malone. Two lines in Ff.

[3641] _This is_] _'Tis_ Pope.

_courtezan_] _curtizan_ Ff.

[3642] _ere_] _or ere_ Pope, reading as verse. _or two ere_ Warburton.

[3643] _word_] _words_ F₃ F₄.

[3644] _nor no_] _and no_ Warburton.

[3645] _not live_] _nor live_ F₂.

[3646] _Nor_] _And_ Pope.

[3647] _Then ... confusion:_] As in Pope. One line in Ff.

[3648] _Then ... feet._] Transferred by Hanmer (Warburton) to follow
line 84.

[3649] _I live_] _I do live_ F₃ F₄, reading line 95 as two lines.

[3650] SCENE III.] SCENE II. Rowe. SCENE IV. Pope.

Gloucester's castle.] An Apartment in Gloster's Castle. Rowe.

Enter....] Enter Gloster, and Edmund. Ff. Enter Glocester, and the
Bastard with lights. Qq (Gloster Q₂).

[3651] _Alack ... careful._] Prose in Ff. Twenty lines in Qq.

[3652] _took_] _took me_ Q₂.

[3653] _their perpetual_] Jennens. _their_ Qq. _perpetuall_ Ff.

[3654] _nor_] Qq. _or_ Ff.

[3655] _and_] om. Rowe (ed. 2).

[3656] _There's a_] Qq. _There is_ Ff.

_betwixt_] Qq. _betweene_ Ff.

[3657] _there is_] F₂ F₃ F₄. _ther is_ F₁. _There's_ Q₁ Q₃. _Ther's_ Q₂.

[3658] _footed_] Ff. _landed_ Qq.

_seek_] _seeke_ Qq. _looke_ Ff. _look for_ Pope.

[3659] _bed. Though_] Edd. (Globe ed.) _bed, though_ Qq. _bed, if_ Ff.
_bed; if_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[3660] _for it_] _for 't_ Q₂.

[3661] _is some strange thing_] Qq. _is strange things_ Ff. _are
strange things_ Pope.

[3662] _This ... fall._] As in Ff. Four lines, ending _know, ...
deserving, ... lesse ... fall,_ in Qq.

[3663] _courtesy, forbid thee,_] _courtesie, forbid thee_, Theobald,
_courtesie forbid thee_, Q₁ F₄. _curtesie forbid thee,_ Q₂ F₁ F₂ F₃.
_curtisie forbid thee,_ Q₃. _courtesie forbid thee_ Pope.

[3664] _draw me_] Q₂ Ff. _draw to me_ Q₁ Q₃.

[3665] _loses_] Q₁ Q₃ F₄. _looses_ The rest.

[3666] _The_] Ff. _then_ Qq.

_doth_] Ff. _do_ Q₁ Q₃. _doe_ Q₂.

[3667] SCENE IV.] SCENE III. Rowe. SCENE V. Pope.

The heath....] Part of the Heath with a Hovel. Rowe.

[3668] _Here ... endure._] As in Ff. Prose in Qq.

[3669] _of the_] _of_ Pope.

_night's_] _nights_ Q₂.

[3670] [Storm still.] Ff. om. Qq. Transferred by Capell to the
beginning of the Scene.

[3671] Lear. _Let ... here._] Repeated in Johnson, and Steevens (1773).

[3672] _here_] Ff. om. Qq.

_Wilt_] _Will't_ Theobald (ed. 2).

_break my_] _break, my_ Steevens conj.

[3673] _I had ... enter._] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_I had_] _I'd_ Pope.

[3674] _think'st 'tis_] _think'st_ So quoted in Johnson's Dictionary
(ed. 1).

_contentious_] Ff. _crulentious_ Q₁ Q₂ (Mus. imp. and Bodl. 1) Q₃.
_tempestious_ Q₂ (Cap. Dev. Mus. per. and Bodl. 2). _truculent_ Anon.
MS. See note (V). _cruel, lentous_ Jackson conj.

[3675] _skin: so 'tis_] _skin, so tis_ Qq. _skin, so: 'tis_ Ff.
Corrected by Rowe (ed. 2).

[3676] _Thou'ldst_] _Thou'dst_ Ff. _thoud'st_ Q₂. _thou wouldst_ Q₁ Q₃.

[3677] _thy_] _they_ F₁.

_lay_] _light_ F₄.

_raging_] Q₁ Q₂ (Mus. imp. and Bodl. 1) Q₃. _roring_ Q₂ (Cap. Dev. Mus.
per. and Bodl. 2). _roaring_ Ff.

[3678] _Thou'ldst_] _Thou'dst_ Ff. _Thoud'st_ Qq.

_mind's_] _minds_ F₃ F₄.

[3679] _body's_] Rowe. _bodies_ Qq Ff.

_the_] Q₁ Ff. _this_ Q₂. om. Q₃.

_in my mind_] _here_ Seymour conj.

[3680] _beats_] F₃ F₄. _beates_ Q₂ (Cap. Dev. Mus. per. and Bodl. 2) F₁
F₂. _beares_ Q₁ Q₂ (Mus. imp. and Bodl. 1) Q₃.

_there. Filial ingratitude!_] Rowe. _there. Filial ingratitude,_ F₃ F₄.
_their filiall ingratitude,_ Qq. _there, Filiall ingratitude,_ F₁ F₂.

[3681] _this hand_] _his hand_ F₃ F₄.

[3682] _to't_] _to it_ Q₁ Q₃.

_home_] _sure_ Qq.

[3683] _In such ... endure:_] Omitted in Qq, ending the lines
_sure; ... this!... father, ... lies, ... that._

[3684] _gave you_] Qq. _gave_ Ff.

_all,--_] _all--_ Rowe. _all,_ Qq Ff.

[3685] _enter here._] _enter._ Qq.

[3686] _thine own_] _thy owne_ Q₁. _thy one_ Q₂.

[3687] [To the Fool] Johnson.

[3688] _In, boy; ... sleep._] Omitted in Qq.

[3689] _poverty,--_] _poverty--_ Rowe. _povertie,_ F₁. _proverty,_ F₂
F₃ F₄.

[3690] [Fool goes in.] Johnson. Exit. Ff (after line 26). om. Qq. Exit
Fool. Rowe, after line 26. Exit Fool. Capell, after _in,_ line 27.

[3691] _storm_] _night_ Qq.

[3692] _loop'd_] Pope. _loopt_ Qq. _lop'd_ Ff.

_window'd_] Ff. _windowed_ Qq.

[3693] [Enter Edgar, and Foole. Ff. Enter Edgar disguised like a Madman
and Fool. Rowe.

[3694] SCENE VI. Pope.

Edg. [Within] Theobald. Edg. Ff. om. Qq.

[3695] _Fathom ... Tom!_] Omitted in Qq.

[3696] [The Fool ... hovel.] Theobald, after line 40. Transferred by
Capell. om. Qq Ff.

[3697] _Come ... me!_] Prose in Qq Ff. Verse, the first line ending
_spirit_, in Johnson.

[3698] _Who's there?_] _whose there_. Q₂.

[3699] _A spirit, a spirit,_] Once only in Qq.

_name's_] _name_ is Q₁ Q₃. _nam's_ Q₂.

[3700] _What ... forth._] Prose in Qq Ff. Verse in Johnson.

[3701] _i' the_] _in the_ Qq.

[3702] _forth._] _forth?_ Q₂.

Enter ... madman.] Theobald.

[3703] SCENE VI. Hanmer.

[3704] _Away!... thee._] Prose in Qq Ff. Verse in Johnson.

[3705] _Through_] _thorough_ Q₂.

[3706] _Through ... wind._] Printed in italics by Staunton.

[3707] _hawthorn_] F₄. _hathorne_ Qq. _hauthorne_ F₁ F₂. _hauthorn_ F₃.

_blows the cold wind_] _blowes the colde winde_ Q₁ Q₃. _blowes the cold
wind_ Q₂. _blow the windes_ F₁. _blow the winds_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

_Hum!_] _Humh,_ Ff. _Humph,_ Rowe. om. Qq.

[3708] _cold_] Qq. om. Ff.

[3709] Prose in Qq Ff. Verse in Steevens (1778).

[3710] _Hast ... thy two_] Qq. _Did'st thou give all to thy_ Ff.

_thou_] _thou too_ Keightley, reading as verse.

[3711] _through flame,_] Omitted in Qq.

[3712] _ford_] _foord_ Qq. _sword_ Ff. _swamp_ Collier MS. _sward_
Anon. conj. _flood_ Anon. conj.

_whirlpool_] _whirl-pool_ Q₃. _whirli-poole_ Q₁ Q₂. _whirle-poole_ F₁.
_whirle poole_ F₂ F₃. _whirlepool_ F₄. _through whirlpool_ Johnson.

_hath_] Ff. _has_ Qq.

[3713] _pew_] Pope (ed. 2). _pue_ Qq Ff.

_ratsbane_] _rate-bane_ F₂.

[3714] _porridge_] _porredge_ Ff. _pottage_ Qq.

[3715] _four-inched_] Hyphened by Capell _foure incht_ Qq F₁. _foure
archt_ F₂. _four arch'd_ F₃ F₄.

[3716] _Bless_] _Blesse_ Qq. _Blisse_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _Bliss_ F₄.

[3717] _O do, de, ... de._] Omitted in Qq.

[3718] _star-blasting_] _starre-blusting_ Qq.

[3719] _there again_] _here again_ F₄.

_and there_] om. Qq.

[Storm still.] Ff. om. Qq.

[3720] _What, have his_] Theobald. _What, his_ Q₁ Q₂. _Ha's his_ F₁.
_Has his_ F₂ F₃. _What his_ Q₃. _Have his_ F₃.

_pass_] _asse_ F₄.

[3721] _Didst ... them_] Qq. _Would'st ... 'em_ Ff. _Didst ... 'em_
Pope.

[3722] _shamed_] _ashamed_ Keightley.

[3723] _light_] _fall_ Qq.

[3724] _begot ... daughters._] Divided as in Ff. One line in Qq.

[3725] _daughters_] _daughter_ F₂.

[3726] _Pillicock ... loo!_] As in Johnson. One line in Qq Ff.

[3727] _on_] _one_ Q₃.

_Pillicock-hill_] Hyphened by Rowe. _pelicocks hill_ Q₁ Q₂. _pelicacks
hill_ Q₃.

[3728] _Halloo, ... loo!_] Warburton. _alow: alow, loo, loo._ Ff. _a lo
lo lo._ Qq. _Haloo, loo, loo._ Capell.

[3729] _o' the]_ _o' th'_ F₁. _oth'_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _of the_ Q₁ Q₃. _at'h_
Q₂.

[3730] _word justly_] Pope. _words justly_ Qq. _words Iustice_ F₁
_word, justice_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _word, do justice_ Rowe. _word's justice_
Knight.

[3731] _set not_] _set on_ F₃ F₄.

_sweet heart_] Qq. Hyphened in Ff.

[3732] _gloves_] _cloves_ Anon. apud Theobald conj.

[3733] _mistress'_] Dyce. _mistris_ Qq Ff. _mistress's_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[3734] _in ... of_] _in the contriving_ Pope. _on the contriving_
Hanmer. _on the contriving of_ Capell.

[3735] _deeply_] Q₂ Q₃. _deepely_ Q₁. _deerely_ F₁ F₂. _dearly_ F₃ F₄.

[3736] _of hand_] Qq F₁. _hand_ F₂. _handed_ F₃ F₄.

[3737] _rustling_] Ff. _ruslings_ Qq. _rufflings_ Anon. MS. See note
(V).

_silks_] _sickles_ Q₃.

[3738] _woman_] _women_ Qq.

_brothels_] _brothell_ Qq.

[3739] _plackets_] _placket_ Qq.

_books_] _booke_ Qq.

[3740] _Still ... wind._] Printed in italics by Staunton.

_the hawthorn_] _thy hawthorn_ F₃ F₄.

_hawthorn_] _hathorne_ Qq. _hauthorne_ F₁ F₂.

[3741] says _suum, mun, ha, no, nonny_] Steevens. _sayes suum, mun,
nonny_ Ff. _hay no on ny,_ Qq. _Ha! nenni;_ Capell. _Hey!--no--on--_
Johnson conj.

[3742] _my boy, my boy_] Qq. _my Boy, Boy_ Ff.

_sessa! let_] _sessa; let_ Malone. _Sesey: let_ F₁. _Sessy: let_ F₂ F₃
F₄. _cease let_ Q₁. _caese let_ Q₂. _ceas let_ Q₃. _sesse; let_ Capell.

_trot by_] _trot my_ F₃ F₄.

[Storm still.] Omitted in Qq.

[3743] _Why,_] _Why_ Qq. om. Ff.

_wert_] _were_ Staunton.

_thy grave_] Qq. _a grave_ Ff.

[3744] _Why ... here._] None lines of verse in Keightley, ending
_answer ... skies ... well: ... hide, ... Ha!... art ... is, ...
animal ... here._

[3745] _than_] _but_ Qq.

_this? Consider_] _this cōsider_ Q₂.

[3746] _Ha!_] _Ha?_ Ff. om. Qq.

_here's_] Ff. _he'rs_ Q₁ Q₃. _her's_ Q₂.

_on's_] F₁ F₃ F₄. _ons_ Q₂ F₂. _ones_ Q₁ Q₃. _of us_ Pope.

_sophisticated_] _so phisticated_ Q₂.

[3747] _lendings_] Q₂ (Cap. Dev. Mus. per. and Bodl. 2) Ff. _leadings_
Q₁ Q₂ (Mus. imp. and Bodl. 1) Q₃.

_come, unbutton here._] Ff (_heere_ F₁ F₂). _come on be true._ Q₁ Q₃.
_come on bee true_. Q₂ (Mus. imp. and Bodl. 1). _come on_ Q₂ (Cap. Dev.
Mus. per. and Bodl. 2).

[Tearing ...] Rowe. Tearing ...; Kent and the Fool strive to hinder
him. Capell. om Qq Ff.

[3748] _Prithee_] Q₁. _Prithe_ Q₂. _Prythee_ F₁. _Prethee_ The rest.

_contented_] _content_ Qq.

[3749] _wild field_] Q₂ F₃ F₄. _wilde field_ Q₁ F₁ F₂. _wildfield_ Q₃.
_wide field_ Jennens, and Long MS.

[3750] _all_] _and all_ Rowe.

_on's_] Ff. _in_ Qq.

[3751] Enter ... torch.] Ff, after line 106. Transferred by Capell.
Enter Glocester. Qq (Gloster. Q₂), after line 110. Pope puts it after
line 120.

[3752] _fiend_] Qq. om. Ff.

_Flibbertigibbet_] Ff. _Sirberdegibit_ Q₁ Q₃. _Sriberdegibit_ Q₂ (Mus.
imp. and Bodl. 1). _Fliberdegibek_ Q₂ (Cap. Dev. Mus. per. and Bodl. 2).

[3753] _till the_] Qq. _at_ Ff.

_gives_] _gins_ Q₁ Q₂ (Mus. imp. and Bodl. 1) Q₃.

[3754] _and the pin, squints_] Ff. _the pinqueuer_ Q₁. _the pin-queues_
Q₂ (Mus. imp. and Bodl. 1). _& the pin, squemes_ Q₂ (Cap. Dev. and Mus.
per.) _the pinquever_ Q₃. See note (XV).

[3755] _hare-lip_] F₃. _hare-lippe_ F₁ F₂. _hair-lip_ F₄. _hare lip_
Q₂ (Cap. Dev. Mus. per. and Bodl. 2). _hart lip_ Q₁ Q₃. _harte lip_ Q₂
(Mus. imp. and Bodl. 1).

[3756] _creature_] _creatures_ Hanmer.

_earth_] _the earth_ F₃ F₄.

[3757] _Saint ... aroint thee:_] Arranged as by Capell. Four lines in
Ff. Prose in Qq.

[3758] _Saint Withold_] _St. Withold_ Theobald. _swithald_ Qq.
_Swithold_ Ff. _Swithin_ So quoted by Hill.

_'old_] _olde_ Q₁. _old_ Q₂ Ff Q₃. _wold_ Theobald (Bishop conj.)
_cold_ So quoted by Hill. _world_ Colman's version (a misprint). _oles_
Farmer conj.

[3759] _He met the night-mare_] Ff. _anelthu night Moore_ Q₁. _a
nellthu night more_ Q₂ (Mus. imp. and Bodl. 1). _he met the night mare_
Q₂ (Cap. Dev. Mus. per. and Bodl. 2). _anelthunight Moor_ Q₃.

_nine-fold_] F₁. _ninefold_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _nine fold_ Qq. _name told_
Warburton. _nine foles_ Farmer conj.

[3760] _her alight_] _her a-light_ Ff. _her, O light_ Q₁ Q₂. _her O
light_ Q₃.

[3761] _troth plight_] Qq. _troth-plight_ Ff.

[3762] _aroint ... aroint_] _aroynt ... aroynt_ Ff. _arint ... arint_
Qq.

_thee, witch,_] _thee, witch_ Q₂ (Cap. Dev. Mus. per. and Bodl. 2).
_thee witch,_ F₁ F₂. _the witch,_ F₃ F₄. _thee, with_ Q₁ Q₂ (Mus. Imp.
and Bodl. 1).

_thee!_] _thee right._ Warburton.

[3763] SCENE VII. Pope.

[3764] _Who's_] F₁ F₃ F₄. _Whos_ F₂. _Whose_ Qq.

[3765] _tadpole_] Johnson. _toade pold_ Q₁. _tode pold_ Q₂ (Mus.
imp. and Bodl. 1). _tod pole_ Q₂ (Cap. Dev. Mus. per. and Bodl. 2).
_toade-pold_ Q₃. _tod-pole_ F₁ F₂. _tod-pool_ F₃ F₄.

_wall-newt_] Q₂ (Cap. Dev. Mus. per. and Bodl. 2). _wall neut_ Ff.
_wall-wort_ Q₁ Q₂ (Mus. imp. and Bodl. 1) Q₃.

_water_] Qq Ff. _water-neut_ Rowe.

_fury_] _fruite_ Q₁. _fruit_ Q₃.

[3766] _sallets_] _sallet_ Capell conj.

[3767] _stock-punished_] _stock-punisht_ Q₁ Q₂. _stock-punish_ Q₃.
_stockt, punish'd_ Ff.

[3768] _had_] Qq. om. Ff.

[3769] _horse ... wear;_] Prose in Qq. Verse in Ff.

[3770] _deer_] _deere_ Qq. _deare_ F₁ F₂. _dear_ F₃ F₄. _geer_ Hanmer.
_cheer_ Grey conj.

[3771] _Have_] Ff. _Hath_ Qq.

[3772] _Smulkin_] Ff. _snulbug_ Qq. _Smolkin_ Theobald.

[3773] _The ... Mahu._] Prose in Qq Ff. Verse in Capell.

[3774] _Modo_] _Mohu_ Johnson.

[3775] _Mahu_] Ff. _ma hu--_ Qq.

[3776] _Our ... gets it._] Verse in Pope. Prose in Qq Ff.

[3777] _is ... lord,_] _is growne so vilde my Lord,_ Qq (_vild_ Q₂).
_my Lord, is growne so vilde,_ Ff (_grown_ F₃ F₄. _vild,_ F₂ F₃ F₄).

[3778] _gets it_] _it gets_ F₃ F₄.

[3779] _Poor_] om. Pope.

[3780] _a-cold_] Hyphened by Rowe.

[3781] _Go ... ready._] As in Ff. Prose in Qq.

[3782] _Though_] _Though all_ F₃ F₄.

[3783] _ventured_] Ff _venterd_ Qq.

[3784] _fire and food_] Ff. _food and fire_ Qq.

_is_] _are_ Hanmer.

[3785] _Good ... house._] Two lines in Ff.

_Good my_] Ff. _My good_ Qq.

[3786] _I'll ... study?_] As in Ff. Prose in Qq.

[3787] _talk_] _take_ F₃ F₄.

_same_] Ff. _most_ Qq.

[3788] _me_] _us_ F₃ F₄.

_private_] _private, friend_ Keightley.

[3789] _Importune ... unsettle._] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

[3790] _once more_] Ff. Omitted in Qq.

[3791] [Storm still.] Ff. om. Qq.

[3792] _ah_] Ff. _O_ Qq.

[3793] _say'st_] _saist_ Q₁ Q₃. _sayest_ Q₂ Ff.

[3794] _I am_] _I'm_ Pope.

[3795] _outlaw'd_] _out-lawed_ Qq.

_he sought_] _a sought_ Q₂.

[3796] _truth_] Q₁ Q₃. _true_ Q₂ Ff.

[Storm still. Malone.

[3797] _hath_] _has_ Q₁ _haz_ Q₃.

_night's_] _nights_ Qq.

[3798] _grace,--_] Capell. _grace_. Qq Ff.

[3799] _O ... company._] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

_mercy, sir. Noble_] _mercy, sir: Noble_ Ff. _mercy noble_ Qq.

[3800] _there, into the_] _there, into th'_ Q₁ Ff. _there, in't_ Q₂.
_there, into th_ Q₃. _into th'_ Pope. _there, to the_ Capell.

[3801] _With ... philosopher._] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

_him; I_] Ff. _him I_ Qq.

[3802] _Good ... fellow._] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[3803] _Sirrah ... us._] _Sirrah, come on; along with us._ Pope. _On,
sirrah; go with us._ Capell.

[3804] _Come ... words:_] As a line of verse in Steevens (1793).

[3805] _tower_] Ff. _towne_ Q₁ Q₂. _town_ Q₃.

_came_] Ff. _come_ Qq.

After this Capell, reading _come_, marks the omission of a line and
proposes to add _The giant roar'd, and out he ran._ Keightley proposes
_The giant saw him, and out he ran._

[3806] [Exeunt.] Ff. om. Qq.

[3807] SCENE V.] SCENE IV. Rowe. SCENE VIII. Pope.

Gloucester's castle.] Rowe. A Room in Gloster's Castle. Capell.

Enter ... Edmund.] Ff. Enter ... Bastard. Qq. Omitted by Johnson.

[3808] _my_] om. F₃ F₄.

_his_] Ff. _the_ Qq.

[3809] _provoking merit_] _provoked spirit_ Hanmer.

[3810] _a-work_] _a-worke_ F₁. _a worke_ Qq F₂. _a-work_ F₃ F₄.

_himself_] _him_ Hanmer.

[3811] _letter_] Qq. _letter which_ Ff.

[3812] _advantages_] _advances_ Anon. conj.

[3813] _this treason were not_] Ff. _his treason were_ Qq. _his treason
were not_ Anon. MS. See note (V).

[3814] [Aside] Theobald. om. Qq Ff.

[3815] _persever_] F₁ F₂ F₃. _persevere_ Qq F₄.

[3816] _dearer_] Qq. _deere_ F₁ F₂. _dear_ F₃ F₄.

[Exeunt.] Ff. Exit. Qq.

[3817] SCENE VI.] SCENE V. Rowe. SCENE IX. Pope.

A chamber ... castle.] A Chamber. Rowe. A Chamber, in a Farmhouse.
Theobald. A Room in some of the out-buildings of the Castle. Capell.

Enter ... Edgar.] Enter ... Tom. Qq (and Lear, Q₂). Enter Kent, and
Gloucester Ff.

[3818] _have_] _has_ Pope. _hath_ Capell.

_to his_] Ff. _to_ Qq.

[3819] _reward_] Ff. _deserve_ Qq. _preserve_ Capell conj.

[Exit Gloucester.] As in Capell. After line 3 in Ff. Omitted in Qq.

Enter Lear, Edgar, and Foole. Ff. om. Qq.

[3820] _Frateretto_] _Fretereto_ Qq. _Fraterretto_ F₁ F₂ F₃.
_Fraterreto_ F₄.

_Nero_] _Trajan_ Upton conj.

[3821] _and_] Ff. om. Qq.

[3822] _be_] _may bee_ Q₁ Q₃.

[3823] _gentleman_] _gentlemen_ F₂.

[3824] Fool. _No ... him._ Lear.] Ff. Omitted in Qq.

[3825] _mad_] om. F₃ F₄.

[3826] _To have ... 'em,--_] Divided as in Ff. Prose in Qq.

[3827] _hissing_] Q₁ Q₃. _hiszing_ Q₂. _hizzing_ Ff. _whizzing_ Boswell
(Malone conj.)

_'em,--_] _'em--_ Theobald. _'em._ Ff. _them._ Qq.

[3828] Edg. _The foul ... 'scape?_] Qq. Omitted in Ff.

[3829] _trusts_] _trust_ Q₃.

[3830] _a horse's health_] _the heels of a horse_ Warburton. _a horse's
heels_ Singer, ed. 2 (Anon. MS.) See note (V).

_a horse's ... oath._] _the health of a horse, the love of a boy, or
the oath of a whore._ Pope.

[3831] _them_] _'em_ Pope.

[3832] [To Edgar.] Capell. To the Fool. Hanmer.

_justicer_] Theobald. _justice_ Qq.

[3833] [To the Fool.] Capell. To Edgar. Hanmer.

_here. Now, you_] _heere, now you_ Q₁ _here, no you_ Q₂. _here now you_
Q₃. _here. Now ye_ Pope.

_foxes!_] _foxes._ Pope. _Foxes_--Qq.

[3834] Edg. _Look ... thee._] Omitted by Pope.

[3835] _Look ... me._] As in Capell. Prose in Qq. Verse, the first line
ending _eyes_, in Theobald, and Capell's Errata.

[3836] _he_] _she_ Theobald.

_Wantest_] Theobald. _wantst_ Q₁ Q₃. _wanst_ Q₂. _wanton'st_ Jennens
(Seward conj.)

[3837] _Wantest thou eyes_] _Wantonizeth thou_ Staunton conj.

[3838] _eyes ... madam?_] _eyes_? Lear. _At trial, Madam._ Rann
(Johnson conj.)

_trial, madam_?] _triall madam_, Q₁ Q₃. _tral madam_ Q₂.

[3839] [Sings. Edd. conj.

_bourn_] _boorne_ Capell. _broome_ Qq. _brook_ Jennens (Johnson conj.)

[3840] [Sings. Edd. conj.

[3841] _Her ... speak_] As in Capell. One line in Qq.

[3842] _herring_] _herrings_ Pope and Anon. MS. See note (V).

[3843] Kent. _How ... cushions_?] Verse in Theobald. Prose in Qq.
Omitted by Pope.

[3844] _cushions_] _cushings_ Q₂.

[3845] _I'll ... father_] Verse in Pope and Theobald. Prose in Qq.

[3846] _trial first. Bring_] _trial, bring me in_ Pope, _trial first,
bring me in_ Theobald.

_the_] Pope, _their_ Qq.

[3847] To Edgar] Capell.

_robed_] Pope, _robbed_ Qq.

[3848] [To the Fool] Capell.

[3849] [To Kent] Capell.]

_o' the_] _of the_ Hanmer.

[3850] Edg. _Let ... gray._ Lear.] Omitted by Pope.

[3851] [Sings. Edd. conj.

[3852] _Sleepest ... harm_] Verse by Theobald. Prose in Qq.

[3853] _I here ... father._] Omitted by Pope.

[3854] _she_] Q₁ Q₃. om. Q₂.

[3855] _cannot_] _can't_ Hanmer.

[3856] _joint-stool_] _joynt stoole_ Q₁ Q₃. _joyne stoole_ Q₂.

[3857] _And ... there!_] Omitted by Pope.

[3858] _store_] _stuff_ Jennens conj. _stone_ Collier, ed. 2 (Theobald
conj.)

_made on_] Capell. _made an_ Qq. _made of_ Theobald.

[3859] _Corruption_] _corruption's_ Hanmer.

_place_] _palace_ Grant White.

[3860] _retain_] _remain_ F₃ F₄.

[3861] [Aside] Rowe.

[3862] _They'll_] _They'l_ Q₁ Q₃. _Theile_ Q₃. _They_ Ff.]

_counterfeiting_] Q₂ F₃ F₄. _counterfeting_ Q₁. _counterfetting_ F₁ F₂
Q₃.

[3863] _Tom ... fled._] As in Rowe. Verse in Ff, the first line ending
_you._ Prose in Qq.

[3864] _mongrel grim, Hound_] Rowe (substantially). _Mongrill,
Grim, Hound_ Ff (_Mungril_ F₄). _Mungrel, Grim-hound_ Q₁. _mungril,
grim-hoūd_ Q₂. _Mungril, Grim-hound_ Q₃.

[3865] _lym_] Hanmer. _Him_ Q₁. _him_ Q₂ Q₃. _Hym_ Ff.

[3866] _Or bobtail tike_] F₄. _Bobtaile tike_ Qq. _Or Bobtaile tight_
F₁ F₂ F₃ (_Bobtail_ F₃).

_trundle-tail_] _Trundle-taile_ Qq. _Troudle taile_ F₁ F₂. _Troudle
tail_ F₃ F₄.

[3867] _them_] Qq. _him_ Ff. _you_ Eccles conj.

[3868] _leap_] _leape_ Qq. _leapt_ Ff.

[3869] _Do ... dry._] Prose in Qq and Capell. Two lines, the first
ending _fayres_, in Ff.

[3870] _Do ... Sessa!_] Malone. _Do, de, de, de: sese:_ Ff. _loudla
doodla_, Qq. _Do, do, de, de, &c._ [singing. Capell.

_Sessa! Come_] _Sessy, come_ Pope. _Bessy, come_ Anon. ap. Rann conj.
_see, see! Come_ Collier.

[3871] _dry._] Qq F₁. _dry._ [Exit. F₂ F₃ F₄.

[3872] _Then ... changed._] Prose in Ff. Five lines in Qq.

[3873] _anatomize_] Ff. _anotomize_ Qq.

[3874] _her heart. Is_] Ff. _her, Hart is_ Q₁. _her Hart is_ Q₂. _her
Heart is_ Q₃.

[3875] _makes_] Qq. _make_ Ff.

_these hard hearts?_] Rowe. _these hard-hearts._ F₁ F₂. _these hard
hearts._ F₃ F₄. _this hardnesse;_ Q₁ Q₃. _this hardnes_, Q₂.

[To Edgar] Capell.

[3876] _for_] Ff. _you for_ Qq.

[3877] _garments. You will say_] Ff. _garment; youl say_ Q₁ Q₃.
_garments youle say,_ Q₂.

_attire_] Qq. om. Ff.

[3878] _and rest_] Omitted in Qq.

[pointing to a mean Couch. Capell.

[3879] Prose in Qq Ff. Verse in Rowe, reading with Ff.

[3880] _so, so, so._] Qq. _so, so._ Ff.

_i' the_] _in the_ Q₁ Q₃.

_So, so, so._] Qq. Omitted in Ff.

[3881] Fool. _And ... noon._] Ff. Omitted in Qq.

Re-enter ...] Capell. Enter Glocester. Qq (Gloster Q₂). Enter Gloster.
Ff, after line 79. Re-Enter Glo'ster. Pope, after line 79.

[3882] _Come ... master?_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[3883] _There ... provision_] Arranged as in Ff. Five lines, ending
_friend, ... master, ... thine, ... losse, ... provision,_ in Qq.

[3884] _in't_] _in it_ Q₁ Q₃.

[3885] _toward_] Ff. _towards_ Qq.

[3886] _shouldst_] _should_ Johnson.

[3887] _Take up, take up_] Ff. _Take up to keepe_ Q₁ Q₂ (Mus. imp. and
Bodl. 1) Q₃. _Take up the King_ Q₂ (Cap. Dev. Mus. per. and Bodl. 2).
_Take up to the keep_ Becket conj.

[3888] Kent. _Oppressed ... behind._ Glou.] Omitted in Ff.

[3889] _Oppressed_] Qq. _Opprest_ Theobald.

[3890] _balm'd_] Theobald. _balmed_ Qq.

_sinews_] Qq. _senses_ Theobald.

[3891] _Which ... behind._] Arranged as by Theobald. Two lines, the
first ending cure, in Qq.

[3892] _convenience_] _conveniency_ Theobald.

[3893] [To the Fool] Theobald.

[3894] _Come, come,_] _Come, away,_ Pope.

[Exeunt ... Edgar.] Edd. (Globe ed.) Exit. Qq. Exeunt. Ff. Exeunt,
bearing off the King. Manet Edgar. Theobald. Exeunt Kent, Gloster, and
the Fool, bearing off Lear. Capell.

[3895] Edg. _When ... lurk._] Omitted in Ff. See note (XVI).

[3896] _When ... foes_] As in Q₁ Q₃. Prose in Q₂.

[3897] _suffers suffers most_] _suffers, suffers most_ Theobald.
_suffers suffers, most_ Q₂. _suffers, most_ Q₁ Q₃.

[3898] _doth_] _does_ Theobald.

[3899] _father'd!_] Theobald, _fatherd,_ Q₁. _fathered,_ Q₂ Q₃.

[3900] After _bewray_ Warburton marks an omission.

[3901] _thought defiles_] Theobald. _thoughts defile_ Qq.

[3902] _What will hap_] _Hap what will hap_ Anon. MS. See note (V).
_What will, hap_ Theobald.

_What ... to-night,_] Qq. _What ... to-night?_ Capell.

[3903] [Exit.] Exit Edgar. Theobald, om. Qq Ff.

[3904] SCENE VII.] SCENE VI. Rowe. SCENE X. Pope.

Gloucester's castle.] Rowe. A Room in the Castle. Capell.

Regan] Q₁ F₁ F₂ Q₃. and Regan and Q₂. om. F₃ F₄.

Edmund, and Servants.] Theobald. Bastard, and Servants. Ff. and
Bastard. Qq.

[3905] _Post ... Gloucester._] Prose in Ff. Two lines, the first ending
_letter,_ in Qq.

[3906] _traitor_] Ff. _villaine_ Q₁ Q₃. _vilaine_ Q₂.

[Exeunt....] Capell. om. Qq Ff.

[3907] _Leave ... like._] Prose in Q₁ Ff Q₃. Four lines in Q₂.

[3908] _displeasure_] _disposure_ Collier MS.

[3909] _revenges_] _revenge_ Qq.

[3910] _Advise_] _Advice_ F₁.

_where_] _when_ Steevens (1778).

_festinate_] F₂ F₃ F₄. _festuant_ Qq. _festiuate_ F₁. _festivant_ Anon.
MS. See note (V).

[3911] _Our ... Gloucester._] Prose in Ff. Two lines in Qq.

[3912] _posts_] _poste_ Q₁. _post_ Q₂ Q₃.

[3913] _and intelligent_] Ff. _and intelligence_ Qq. _in intelligence_
Capell (withdrawn in MS.)

[3914] Enter Oswald.] Collier. Enter Steward. Ff. Enter Steward. Qq,
after _king?_ line 13.

[3915] _Some ... friends._] As in Ff. Prose in Qq.

[3916] _questrists_] Ff. _questrits_ Qq. _questers_ Pope, _coystrills_
Anon. MS. See note (V). _questists_ Heath conj.

_after him_] _after_ Hanmer (ed. 2).

[3917] _lords_] _lord's_ Pope.

[3918] _toward_] Ff. _towards_ Qq.

[3919] [Exeunt ... Oswald.] Dyce. Exeunt ... Steward. Capell, (after
line 20). Exit Gon. and Bast. Qq, after line 20. Exit. Ff, after line
20. Exit Oswald (after line 19), Exeunt Goneril and Edmund (after line
21). Staunton.

[3920] [Exeunt other Servants.] Capell. om. Qq Ff.

[3921] _well_] om. Qq.

[3922] _Shall ... blame_] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

[3923] _courtesy_] _curtesie_ Qq. _curt'sie_ Ff.

[3924] SCENE XI. Pope.

_Who's_] _Whose_ Q₂.

Enter ... three.] Qq. Enter Gloucester, and Servants. Ff (after
_comptroll_). Re-enter Servants, with Gloster Prisoner. Capell.

[3925] _What ... friends._] As in Qq. Three lines, the first two ending
_graces?... ghests,_ in Ff.

[3926] _mean_] F₄. _meanes_ Qq F₁ F₂. _means_ F₃.

_friends_] _friends_ [to the Ser. Capell MS.

[3927] [Servants bind him.] They bind him. Rowe. om. Qq Ff.

[3928] _I'm none_] F₃ F₄. _I'me none_ F₁. _Ime none_ F₂. _I am none_
Capell. _I am true_ Qq.

[3929] _To ... find--_] As in Qq. Two lines in Ff.

_find--_] Qq. _finde._ F₁ F₂. _find._ F₃ F₄.

[Regan....] Johnson, om. Qq Ff.

[3930] _By ... beard._] As in Ff. Prose in Qq.

[3931] _Naughty ... chin_] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

[3932] _I am_] _I'm_ Pope.

[3933] _robbers'_] Theobald. _robbers_ Qq Ff. _robber's_ Pope.

_favours_] _favour_ Hanmer (Warburton).

[3934] _do?_] Q₁ F₁ Q₃ F₄. _doe._ Q₂. _doe_ F₂. _do_ F₃.

[3935] _Come, sir,_] As in Qq. In a separate line in Ff.

[3936] _simple answerer_] Qq. _simple answer'd_ Ff. _simple-answer'd_
Hanmer.

[3937] _And what ... kingdom?_] As in Rowe. Prose in Qq Ff.

[3938] _Late_] Q₂ Ff. _lately_ Q₁ Q₃.

[3939] _To ... Speak._] As in Capell. One line in Qq. Two, the first
ending _hands,_ in Ff.

[3940] _have you sent_] Q₁ Q₃. _you have sent_ Q₂ Ff.

[3941] _I have_] _I've_ Hanmer.

[3942] _Dover_] _Dover, sir_ Hanmer.

[3943] _Wherefore ... peril--_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_peril--_] _perill--_ Qq. _perill._ F₁ F₂ F₃. _peril?_ F₄.

[3944] _first_] Qq. om. Ff.

[3945] _I am ... course._] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[3946] _sir_] Qq. om. Ff.

[3947] _anointed_] F₄. _annoynted_ Q₂ (Mus. per. and Bodl. 2).
_annointed_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _aurynted_ Q₁ Q₂ (Cap. Dev. Mus. imp. and Bodl.
1) Q₃.

_stick_] F₃ F₄. _sticke_ F₁ F₂. _rash_ Qq. _rush_ Anon. MS. See note
(V).

[3948] _as his bare_] Ff. _of his lou'd_ Q₁ Q₂ (Cap. Dev. Mus. imp. and
Bodl. 1). _on his lowd_ Q₂ (Mus. per. and Bodl. 2). _of his lov'd_ Q₃.

[3949] _hell-black night_] Pope. _hell-blacke-night_ Ff. _hell blacke
night_ Qq.

_buoy'd_] Ff. _laid_ Q₁ Q₃. _layd_ Q₂ (Cap. Dev. Mus. imp. and Bodl.
1). _bod_ Q₂ (Mus. per. and Bodl. 2). _boil'd_ Warburton.

[3950] _And ... heart,_] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

[3951] _stelled_] Q₂ (Mus. per. and Bodl. 2) Ff. _steeled_ Q₁ Q₂ (Cap.
Dev. Mus. imp. and Bodl. 1) Q₃. _stellar_ Hanmer.

[3952] _holp_] F₃ F₄. _holpe_ F₁ F₂. _holpt_ Qq. _help'd_ Pope.

_rain_] F₃ F₄. _raine_ F₁ F₂. _rage_ Qq.

[3953] _howl'd that stern_] F₃ F₄. _howl'd that sterne_ F₁ F₂. _heard
that dearne_ Qq. _howl'd that dearn_ Capell.

[3954] _Good_] _go,_ Theobald (ed. 2).

[3955] _cruels_] _quarrels_ Jervis conj.

_subscribed_] _subscrib'd_ Qq. _subscribe_ Ff.

[3956] _these_] Ff. _those_ Qq.

[Gloster is held down while Cornwall treads out one of his Eyes. Rowe.
Gloster is held down in his Chair, while Cornwal plucks out one his
Eyes, and stamps on it. Capell.

[3957] _old,_] Ff. _old_ Q₂. _old--_ Q₁ Q₃.

[3958] _you_] Ff. _ye_ Qq.

[3959] _the other too_] _th other too_ Ff. _tother to_ Qq.

[3960] _vengeance--_] Qq. _vengeance._ Ff.

First Serv.] 1. S. Capell. Servant. Qq. Serv. Ff.

[3961] _I have_] _I've_ Pope.

_you_] om. Q₂.

[3962] _But ... hold._] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

[3963] _If ... mean?_] As in Ff. Prose in Qq.

[3964] _on this_] _in this_ Capell conj.

[3965] [They draw....] Draw and fight. Qq. Omitted in Ff. Fight, in the
scuffle Cornwall is wounded. Rowe.

[3966] _Nay_] Ff. _Why_ Qq.

[3967] Reg.] Reg. [to another servant. Johnson. Reg. [To Corn. Collier
conj.

_thus!_] _thus?_ Ff. _thus._ Qq.

[Takes....] She takes.... Qq. Killes him. Ff. Snatches a Sword from an
Att: and stabs him. Capell.

[3968] _O ... him. O!_] As in Ff. Prose in Qq.

[3969] _slain! My lord, you have_] _slaine: my Lord, you have_ Ff.
_slaine my Lord, yet have you_ Qq.

[3970] _him_] _them_ Dyce (ed. 2). _'em_ Dyce conj. (ed. 1).

[Dies.] He dies. Q₁. om. Q₂ Ff Q₃.

[3971] _vile_] Pope. _vilde_ Q₁ F₁ F₂. _vild_ Q₂ F₃ F₄.

[3972] [Treads out the other Eye. Rowe. Dashing Gloster's other Eye to
the Ground. Capell.

[3973] _All ... Edmund!_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_comfortless._] _comfortles,_ Qq. _comfortlesse?_ Ff.

[3974] _Edmund ... act._] As in Ff. Prose in Qq.

[3975] _enkindle_] Ff. _unbridle_ Qq.

[3976] _Out ... thee._] As in Ff. Prose in Qq.

[3977] _treacherous_] Ff. _om._ Qq.

[3978] _overture_] _o'erture_ S. Walker conj.

[3979] _O ... you?_] Five lines, ending _follies!... forgive ...
out ... Dover ... you?_ in Pope.

[3980] _O ... abused._] As in Qq Ff. Two lines in Capell.

[3981] _Go ... you?_] As in Capell. Three lines in Ff. Prose in Qq.

[3982] _at gates_] _At th' gates_ Hanmer.

[3983] [Exit....] Exit with Glouster. Ff. Omitted in Qq.

_look_] _do_ Jennens.

[3984] _Turn ... arm._] As in Ff. In Qq the first two lines end
_upon ... untimely._

[3985] _dunghill_] _dungell_ Q₂.

[3986] [Exit....] Exit Qq. Exeunt. Ff. Exeunt Cornwal, and Regan.
Servants unbind Gloster, and lead him out. Capell.

[3987] Sec. Serv. _I'll ... him!_] Omitted in Ff.

[3988] Sec. Serv.] 2. S. Capell. Servant. Qq. 1st Serv. Theobald.

[3989] Third Serv.] 3. S. Capell. 2. Servant. Qq.

[3990] _If ... monsters._] As in Theobald. Prose in Qq.

[3991] Sec. Serv.] 2. S. Capell. 1 Ser. Qq.

_Bedlam_] _bedlom_ Q₂.

[3992] _roguish_] om. Q₂ (Mus. per. and Bodl. 2).

[3993] Third Serv.] 3. S. Capell. 2 Ser. Qq.

[3994] _Go ... him!_] As in Theobald. Prose in Qq.

[3995] _To ... his_] _T' apply to's_ Theobald.

[Exeunt severally.] Theobald. Exit. Qq.




ACT IV.


SCENE I. _The heath._[3996]

                             _Enter_ EDGAR.

    _Edg._ Yet better thus, and known to be contemn'd,[3997]
    Than still contemn'd and flatter'd. To be worst,[3998]
    The lowest and most dejected thing of fortune,[3999]
    Stands still in esperance, lives not in fear:[4000]
    The lamentable change is from the best;                            5
    The worst returns to laughter. Welcome then,[4001][4002]
    Thou unsubstantial air that I embrace![4002]
    The wretch that them hast blown unto the worst[4002]
    Owes nothing to thy blasts. But who comes here?[4002][4003][4004]

             _Enter_ GLOUCESTER, _led by an_ Old Man.[4005]

    My father, poorly led? World, world, O world![4005][4006]         10
    But that thy strange mutations make us hate thee,[4007]
    Life would not yield to age.[4008]

    _Old Man._ O, my good lord, I have been your tenant,[4009]
    and your father's tenant, these fourscore years.[4009][4010]

    _Glou._ Away, get thee away; good friend, be gone:                15
    Thy comforts can do me no good at all;
    Thee they may hurt.

    _Old Man._ Alack, sir, you cannot see your way.[4011]

    _Glou._ I have no way and therefore want no eyes;
    I stumbled when I saw: full oft 'tis seen,                        20
    Our means secure us, and our mere defects[4012]
    Prove our commodities. Ah, dear son Edgar,[4013]
    The food of thy abused father's wrath!
    Might I but live to see thee in my touch,
    I'ld say I had eyes again!

    _Old Man._                 How now! Who 's there?[4014]           25

    _Edg. [Aside]_ O gods! Who is't can say 'I am at the
           worst'?[4015][4016]
    I am worse than e'er I was.[4017]

    _Old Man._                  'Tis poor mad Tom.

    _Edg. [Aside]_ And worse I may be yet: the worst is not[4015]
    So long as we can say 'This is the worst.'[4018]

    _Old Man._ Fellow, where goest?

    _Glou._                         Is it a beggar-man?               30

    _Old Man._ Madman and beggar too.

    _Glou._ He has some reason, else he could not beg.[4019]
    I' the last night's storm I such a fellow saw,[4020]
    Which made me think a man a worm: my son
    Came then into my mind, and yet my mind                           35
    Was then scarce friends with him: I have heard more since.[4021]
    As flies to wanton boys, are we to the gods;[4022]
    They kill us for their sport.[4023]

    _Edg. [Aside]_                How should this be?[4015][4024][4025]
    Bad is the trade that must play fool to sorrow,[4024][4026]
    Angering itself and others. Bless thee, master![4024][4027]       40

    _Glou._ Is that the naked fellow?

    _Old Man._                        Ay, my lord.

    _Glou._ Then, prithee, get thee gone: if for my sake[4028]
    Thou wilt o'ertake us hence a mile or twain[4029]
    I' the way toward Dover, do it for ancient love;[4030]
    And bring some covering for this naked soul,[4031]                45
    Who I'll entreat to lead me.[4032]

    _Old Man._                   Alack, sir, he is mad.

    _Glou._ 'Tis the times' plague, when madmen lead the blind.[4033]
    Do as I bid thee, or rather do thy pleasure;[4034]
    Above the rest, be gone.

    _Old Man._ I'll bring him the best 'parel that I have,[4035][4036]  50
    Come on't what will.                                        [_Exit._

    _Glou._ Sirrah, naked fellow,--[4037]

    _Edg._ Poor Tom's a-cold. [_Aside_] I cannot daub it
            further.[4015][4038]

    _Glou._ Come hither, fellow.

    _Edg. [Aside]_ And yet I must. Bless thy sweet eyes,
            they bleed.[4015][4039]                                   55

    _Glou._ Know'st thou the way to Dover?

    _Edg._ Both stile and gate, horse-way and foot-path. Poor[4040]
    Tom hath been scared out of his good wits. Bless thee,
        good[4040][4041][4042]
    man's son, from the foul fiend! Five fiends have been in
        poor[4040][4042][4043]
    Tom at once; of lust, as Obidicut; Hobbididence, prince of[4043][4044]  60
    dumbness; Mahu, of stealing; Modo, of murder;[4043][4045]
    Flibbertigibbet, of mopping and mowing; who since possesses[4043][4046]
    chambermaids and waiting-women. So, bless thee, master![4043][4047]

    _Glou._ Here, take this purse, thou whom the heavens' plagues[4048]
    Have humbled to all strokes: that I am wretched[4049]             65
    Makes thee the happier. Heavens, deal so still![4049]
    Let the superfluous and lust-dieted man,[4050]
    That slaves your ordinance, that will not see[4051]
    Because he doth not feel, feel your power quickly;[4052]
    So distribution should undo excess[4053]                          70
    And each man have enough. Dost thou know Dover?

    _Edg._ Ay, master.

    _Glou._ There is a cliff whose high and bending head
    Looks fearfully in the confined deep:[4054]
    Bring me but to the very brim of it,                              75
    And I'll repair the misery thou dost bear
    With something rich about me: from that place[4055]
    I shall no leading need.[4055][4056]

    _Edg._                   Give me thy arm:[4057]
    Poor Tom shall lead thee.                     [_Exeunt._[4057][4058]


SCENE II. _Before the Duke of Albany's palace._

                  _Enter_ GONERIL _and_ EDMUND.[4059]

    _Gon._ Welcome, my lord: I marvel our mild husband
    Not met us on the way.

                         _Enter_ OSWALD.[4060]

                           Now, where's your master?

    _Osw._ Madam, within; but never man so changed.[4061]
    I told him of the army that was landed;[4061]
    He smiled at it: I told him you were coming;[4061]                 5
    His answer was, 'The worse:' of Gloucester's treachery[4061]
    And of the loyal service of his son[4061]
    When I inform'd him, then he call'd me sot[4061]
    And told me I had turn'd the wrong side out:[4061]
    What most he should dislike seems pleasant to him;[4061][4062]    10
    What like, offensive.[4061][4063]

    _Gon. [To Edm.]_ Then shall you go no further.
    It is the cowish terror of his spirit,[4064]
    That dares not undertake: he'll not feel wrongs,
    Which tie him to an answer. Our wishes on the way[4065]
    May prove effects. Back, Edmund, to my brother;[4065][4066]       15
    Hasten his musters and conduct his powers:
    I must change arms at home and give the distaff[4067]
    Into my husband's hands. This trusty servant
    Shall pass between us: ere long you are like to hear,[4068]
    If you dare venture in your own behalf,[4069]                     20
    A mistress's command. Wear this; spare speech;

                                              [_Giving a favour._[4070]

    Decline your head: this kiss, if it durst speak,
    Would stretch thy spirits up into the air:
    Conceive, and fare thee well.[4071]

    _Edm._ Yours in the ranks of death.

    _Gon._                              My most dear Gloucester![4072]  25

                                                   [_Exit Edmund._[4073]

    O, the difference of man and man![4072][4074][4075]
    To thee a woman's services are due:[4075][4076]
    My fool usurps my body.[4075]

    _Osw._                  Madam, here comes my lord.          [_Exit._

                         _Enter_ ALBANY.[4077]

    _Gon._ I have been worth the whistle.[4078]

    _Alb._                                O Goneril![4079]
    You are not worth the dust which the rude wind[4079][4080]        30
    Blows in your face. I fear your disposition:[4081]
    That nature which contemns its origin[4081][4082]
    Cannot be border'd certain in itself;[4081][4083]
    She that herself will sliver and disbranch[4081][4084]
    From her material sap, perforce must wither[4081][4085]           35
    And come to deadly use.[4081]

    _Gon._ No more; the text is foolish.[4081][4086]

    _Alb._ Wisdom and goodness to the vile seem vile:[4081]
    Filths savour but themselves. What have you done?[4081][4087]
    Tigers, not daughters, what have you perform'd?[4081]             40
    A father, and a gracious aged man,[4081]
    Whose reverence even the head-lugg'd bear would lick,[4081][4088]
    Most barbarous, most degenerate! have you madded.[4081]
    Could my good brother suffer you to do it?[4081]
    A man, a prince, by him so benefited![4081][4089]                 45
    If that the heavens do not their visible spirits[4081]
    Send quickly down to tame these vile offences,[4081][4090][4091]
    It will come,[4081][4090][4092]
    Humanity must perforce prey on itself,[4081][4093][4094]
    Like monsters of the deep.[4081][4093]

    _Gon._                     Milk-liver'd man!                      50
    That bear'st a cheek for blows, a head for wrongs;[4095]
    Who hast not in thy brows an eye discerning[4096][4097]
    Thine honour from thy suffering; that not know'st[4096][4098][4099]
    Fools do those villains pity who are punish'd[4098][4099][4100]
    Ere they have done their mischief. Where's thy drum?[4098]        55
    France spreads his banners in our noiseless land,[4098][4101]
    With plumed helm thy state begins to threat,[4098][4102]
    Whiles thou, a moral fool, sit'st still and criest[4098][4103]
    'Alack, why does he so?'[4098]

    _Alb._                   See thyself, devil![4104]
    Proper deformity seems not in the fiend[4104][4105]               60
    So horrid as in woman.[4104]

    _Gon._                 O vain fool!

    _Alb._ Thou changed and self-cover'd thing, for shame,[4106][4107]
    Be-monster not thy feature. Were 't my fitness[4106][4108][4109]
    To let these hands obey my blood,[4106][4109][4110]
    They are apt enough to dislocate and tear[4106][4109][4111]       65
    Thy flesh and bones: howe'er thou art a fiend,[4106][4112]
    A woman's shape doth shield thee.[4106]

    _Gon_. Marry, your manhood mew.[4106][4113]

                          _Enter a_ Messenger.

    _Alb._ What news?[4114]

    _Mess._ O, my good lord, the Duke of Cornwall's dead,[4115][4116]  70
    Slain by his servant, going to put out[4116]
    The other eye of Gloucester.[4116]

    _Alb._                       Gloucester's eyes!

    _Mess._ A servant that he bred, thrill'd with remorse,[4117]
    Opposed against the act, bending his sword[4118]
    To his great master; who thereat enraged[4118][4119]              75
    Flew on him and amongst them fell'd him dead,[4120]
    But not without that harmful stroke which since[4121][4122]
    Hath pluck'd him after.[4122]

    _Alb._                  This shows you are above,[4123][4124]
    You justicers, that these our nether crimes[4123][4124][4125]
    So speedily can venge. But, O poor Gloucester![4123]              80
    Lost he his other eye?[4123]

    _Mess._                Both, both, my lord.[4126]
    This letter, madam, craves a speedy answer;[4126]
    'Tis from your sister.[4126]

    _Gon._ [_Aside_] One way I like this well;[4127]
    But being widow, and my Gloucester with her,[4128]
    May all the building in my fancy pluck[4129]                      85
    Upon my hateful life: another way,[4130]
    The news is not so tart. I'll read, and answer. [_Exit._[4130][4131]

    _Alb._ Where was his son when they did take his eyes?[4132]

    _Mess._ Come with my lady hither.

    _Alb._                            He is not here.[4133]

    _Mess._ No, my good lord; I met him back again.                   90

    _Alb._ Knows he the wickedness?

    _Mess._ Ay, my good lord; 'twas he inform'd against him,
    And quit the house on purpose, that their punishment[4134]
    Might have the freer course.

    _Alb._                       Gloucester, I live[4135][4136]
    To thank thee for the love thou show'dst the king,[4135][4136][4137]  95
    And to revenge thine eyes. Come hither, friend:[4135][4136][4138]
    Tell me what more thou know'st.               [_Exeunt._[4136][4139]


SCENE III. _The French camp near Dover._[4140]

                    _Enter_ KENT _and a_ Gentleman.

    _Kent._ Why the King of France is so suddenly gone[4141]
    back know you the reason?[4141][4142]

    _Gent._ Something he left imperfect in the state which[4143]
    since his coming forth is thought of, which imports to the[4143][4144]
    kingdom so much fear and danger that his personal return[4143][4145]  5
    was most required and necessary.[4143]

    _Kent._ Who hath he left behind him general?[4146]

    _Gent._ The Marshal of France, Monsieur La Far.[4147]

    _Kent._ Did your letters pierce the queen to any demonstration[4148]
    of grief?[4148]                                                   10

    _Gent._ Ay, sir; she took them, read them in my presence,[4149]
    And now and then an ample tear trill'd down
    Her delicate cheek: it seem'd she was a queen[4150]
    Over her passion, who most rebel-like[4150][4151]
    Sought to be king o'er her.[4150]

    _Kent._                     O, then it moved her.                 15

    _Gent._ Not to a rage: patience and sorrow strove[4152]
    Who should express her goodliest. You have seen[4153]
    Sunshine and rain at once: her smiles and tears[4154]
    Were like a better way: those happy smilets[4154][4155]
    That play'd on her ripe lip seem'd not to know[4156]              20
    What guests were in her eyes; which parted thence
    As pearls from diamonds dropp'd. In brief,[4157][4158]
    Sorrow would be a rarity most beloved,[4157]
    If all could so become it.[4157]

    _Kent._                    Made she no verbal question?[4159]

    _Gent._ Faith, once or twice she heaved the name of 'father'[4160]  25
    Pantingly forth, as if it press'd her heart;
    Cried 'Sisters! sisters! Shame of ladies! sisters![4161]
    Kent! father! sisters! What, i' the storm? i' the night?[4161][4162]
    Let pity not be believed!' There she shook[4163]
    The holy water from her heavenly eyes,                            30
    And clamour moisten'd: then away she started[4164]
    To deal with grief alone.

    _Kent._                   It is the stars,[4165][4166]
    The stars above us, govern our conditions;[4166]
    Else one self mate and mate could not beget[4167]
    Such different issues. You spoke not with her since?[4168]        35

    _Gent._ No.

    _Kent._ Was this before the king return'd?

    _Gent._                                    No, since.

    _Kent._ Well, sir, the poor distressed Lear's i' the town;[4169]
    Who sometime in his better tune remembers[4170]
    What we are come about, and by no means[4171]                     40
    Will yield to see his daughter.[4171]

    _Gent._                         Why, good sir?

    _Kent._ A sovereign shame so elbows him: his own unkindness[4172]
    That stripp'd her from his benediction, turn'd her[4173]
    To foreign casualties, gave her dear rights
    To his dog-hearted daughters: these things sting[4174][4175]      45
    His mind so venomously that burning shame[4174][4175]
    Detains him from Cordelia.[4174][4176]

    _Gent._                    Alack, poor gentleman!

    _Kent._ Of Albany's and Cornwall's powers you heard not?[4177]

    _Gent._ 'Tis so; they are afoot.[4178]

    _Kent._ Well, sir, I'll bring you to our master Lear,             50
    And leave you to attend him: some dear cause
    Will in concealment wrap me up awhile;
    When I am known aright, you shall not grieve
    Lending me this acquaintance. I pray you, go[4179]
    Along with me.                            [_Exeunt._[4179][4180]  55


SCENE IV. _The same. A tent._

_Enter, with drum and colours,_ CORDELIA, Doctor, _and_ Soldiers.[4181]

    _Cor._ Alack, 'tis he: why, he was met even now
    As mad as the vex'd sea; singing aloud;[4182]
    Crown'd with rank fumiter and furrow-weeds,[4183]
    With bur-docks, hemlock, nettles, cuckoo-flowers,[4184]
    Darnel, and all the idle weeds that grow                           5
    In our sustaining corn. A century send forth;[4185]
    Search every acre in the high-grown field,
    And bring him to our eye.  [_Exit an Officer._]  What can
              man's wisdom[4186][4187][4188][4189]
    In the restoring his bereaved sense?[4186][4188][4190]
    He that helps him take all my outward worth.[4186][4191]          10

    _Doct._ There is means, madam:[4192]
    Our foster-nurse of nature is repose,
    The which he lacks: that to provoke in him,[4193]
    Are many simples operative, whose power
    Will close the eye of anguish.

    _Cor._                         All blest secrets,[4194]           15
    All you unpublish'd virtues of the earth,[4194]
    Spring with my tears! be aidant and remediate[4195]
    In the good man's distress! Seek, seek for him;[4196]
    Lest his ungovern'd rage dissolve the life
    That wants the means to lead it.

                       _Enter a_ Messenger.[4197]

    _Mess._                          News, madam;[4198]               20
    The British powers are marching hitherward.[4198]

    _Cor._ 'Tis known before; our preparation stands
    In expectation of them. O dear father,
    It is thy business that I go about;[4199]
    Therefore great France[4199]                                      25
    My mourning and important tears hath pitied.[4200]
    No blown ambition doth our arms incite,[4201]
    But love, dear love, and our aged father's right:[4202]
    Soon may I hear and see him!                        [_Exeunt._[4203]


SCENE V. _Gloucester's castle._

                   _Enter_ REGAN _and_ OSWALD.[4204]

    _Reg._ But are my brother's powers set forth?[4205]

    _Osw._                                        Ay, madam.[4205]

    _Reg._ Himself in person there?[4205][4206]

    _Osw._                          Madam, with much ado:[4207]
    Your sister is the better soldier.[4207][4208]

    _Reg._ Lord Edmund spake not with your lord at home?[4209]

    _Osw._ No, madam.                                                  5

    _Reg._ What might import my sister's letter to him?[4210]

    _Osw._ I know not, lady.

    _Reg._ Faith, he is posted hence on serious matter.[4211]
    It was great ignorance, Gloucester's eyes being out,
    To let him live: where he arrives he moves                        10
    All hearts against us: Edmund, I think, is gone,[4212]
    In pity of his misery, to dispatch[4213]
    His nighted life; moreover, to descry[4213]
    The strength o' the enemy.[4213][4214]

    _Osw._ I must needs after him, madam, with my letter.[4215]       15

    _Reg._ Our troops set forth to-morrow: stay with us;[4216]
    The ways are dangerous.

    _Osw._                  I may not, madam:[4217]
    My lady charged my duty in this business.[4217]

    _Reg._ Why should she write to Edmund? Might not you[4218]
    Transport her purposes by word? Belike,[4218][4219]               20
    Something--I know not what: I'll love thee much,[4220]
    Let me unseal the letter.

    _Osw._                    Madam, I had rather--[4221]

    _Reg._ I know your lady does not love her husband;
    I am sure of that: and at her late being here[4222]
    She gave strange œillades and most speaking looks[4223]           25
    To noble Edmund. I know you are of her bosom.[4224]

    _Osw._ I, madam?[4225]

    _Reg._ I speak in understanding: you are; I know't:[4226]
    Therefore I do advise you, take this note:[4227]
    My lord is dead; Edmund and I have talk'd;                        30
    And more convenient is he for my hand
    Than for your lady's: you may gather more.[4228]
    If you do find him, pray you, give him this;[4229]
    And when your mistress hears thus much from you,
    I pray, desire her call her wisdom to her.                        35
    So, fare you well.[4230]
    If you do chance to hear of that blind traitor,
    Preferment falls on him that cuts him off.

    _Osw._ Would I could meet him, madam! I should show[4231]
    What party I do follow.

    _Reg._                  Fare thee well.         [_Exeunt._[4232]  40


SCENE VI. _Fields near Dover._

    _Enter_ GLOUCESTER, _and_ EDGAR _dressed like a peasant_.[4233]

    _Glou._ When shall we come to the top of that same hill?[4234]

    _Edg._ You do climb up it now: look, how we labour.[4235]

    _Glou._ Methinks the ground is even.

    _Edg._                               Horrible steep.[4236][4237]
    Hark, do you hear the sea?[4237][4238]

    _Glou._                    No, truly.

    _Edg._ Why then your other senses grow imperfect                   5
    By your eyes' anguish.

    _Glou._                So may it be indeed:
    Methinks thy voice is alter'd, and thou speak'st[4239]
    In better phrase and matter than thou didst.[4240]

    _Edg._ You're much deceived: in nothing am I changed[4241]
    But in my garments.

    _Glou._             Methinks you're better spoken.[4242]          10

    _Edg._ Come on, sir; here's the place: stand still. How fearful[4243]
    And dizzy 'tis to cast one's eyes so low![4244]
    The crows and choughs that wing the midway air
    Show scarce so gross as beetles: half way down
    Hangs one that gathers samphire, dreadful trade![4245]            15
    Methinks he seems no bigger than his head:
    The fishermen that walk upon the beach[4246]
    Appear like mice; and yond tall anchoring bark[4247]
    Diminish'd to her cock; her cock, a buoy[4248]
    Almost too small for sight: the murmuring surge                   20
    That on the unnumberd idle pebbles chafes[4249]
    Cannot be heard so high. I'll look no more,[4250]
    Lest my brain turn and the deficient sight
    Topple down headlong.

    _Glou._               Set me where you stand.

    _Edg._ Give me your hand: you are now within a foot[4251][4252]   25
    Of the extreme verge: for all beneath the moon[4251][4253]
    Would I not leap upright.[4251][4254]

    _Glou._                   Let go my hand.
    Here, friend, 's another purse; in it a jewel
    Well worth a poor man's taking: fairies and gods[4255]
    Prosper it with thee! Go thou farther off;[4256]                  30
    Bid me farewell, and let me hear thee going.

    _Edg._ Now fare you well good sir.[4257]

    _Glou._                            With all my heart.

    _Edg._ Why I do trifle thus with his despair[4258]
    Is done to cure it.[4258]

    _Glou._ [_Kneeling_] O you mighty gods![4259]
    This world I do renounce, and in your sights                      35
    Shake patiently my great affliction off:
    If I could bear it longer and not fall
    To quarrel with your great opposeless wills,
    My snuff and loathed part of nature should[4260]
    Burn itself out.  If Edgar live, O bless him![4261]               40
    Now, fellow, fare thee well.              [_He falls forward._[4262]

    _Edg._                       Gone, sir: farewell.[4263][4264]
    And yet I know not how conceit may rob[4263][4265][4266]
    The treasury of life, when life itself[4263][4265][4267]
    Yields to the theft: had he been where he thought[4263][4265]
    By this had thought been past.  Alive or dead?[4263][4265][4268]  45
    Ho, you sir!  friend!  Hear you, sir!  speak![4263][4269]
    Thus might he pass indeed: yet he revives.[4263][4270]
    What are you, sir?[4263]

    _Glou._            Away, and let me die.

    _Edg._ Hadst thou been aught but gossamer, feathers, air,[4271]
    So many fathom down precipitating,                                50
    Thou'dst shiver'd like an egg: but thou dost breathe;[4272]
    Hast heavy substance; bleed'st not; speak'st; art sound.[4273]
    Ten masts at each make not the altitude[4274]
    Which thou hast perpendicularly fell:[4275]
    Thy life's a miracle. Speak yet again.                            55

    _Glou._ But have I fall'n, or no?[4276]

    _Edg._ From the dread summit of this chalky bourn.[4277]
    Look up a-height; the shrill-gorged lark so far[4278]
    Cannot be seen or heard: do but look up.[4279]

    _Glou._ Alack, I have no eyes.                                    60
    Is wretchedness deprived that benefit,
    To end itself by death? 'Twas yet some comfort,[4280]
    When misery could beguile the tyrant's rage
    And frustrate his proud will.

    _Edg._                        Give me your arm:[4281]
    Up: so. How is't? Feel you your legs? You stand.[4282]            65

    _Glou._ Too well, too well.

    _Edg._                      This is above all strangeness.
    Upon the crown o' the cliff, what thing was that[4283]
    Which parted from you?

    _Glou._                A poor unfortunate beggar.[4284]

    _Edg._ As I stood here below, methought his eyes[4285]
    Were two full moons; he had a thousand noses,[4286]               70
    Horns whelk'd and waved like the enridged sea:[4287]
    It was some fiend; therefore, thou happy father,
    Think that the clearest gods, who make them honours[4288]
    Of men's impossibilities, have preserved thee.

    _Glou._ I do remember now: henceforth I'll bear                   75
    Affliction till it do cry out itself
    'Enough, enough,' and die. That thing you speak of,[4289]
    I took it for a man; often 'twould say[4290]
    'The fiend, the fiend:' he led me to that place.[4291]

    _Edg._ Bear free and patient thoughts. But who comes
    here?                                                             80

     _Enter_ LEAR, _fantastically dressed with wild flowers_.[4292]

    The safer sense will ne'er accommodate[4293][4294][4295]
    His master thus.[4294]

    _Lear._ No, they cannot touch me for coining; I am the[4296]
    king himself.

    _Edg._ O thou side-piercing sight![4297]                          85

    _Lear._ Nature's above art in that respect. There's your[4298]
    press-money. That fellow handles his bow like a crow-keeper:[4299]
    draw me a clothier's yard. Look, look, a mouse![4299]
    Peace, peace; this piece of toasted cheese will do 't.[4300]
    There's my gauntlet; I'll prove it on a giant. Bring up           90
    the brown bills. O, well flown, bird! i' the clout, i' the[4301][4302]
    clout: hewgh! Give the word.[4302][4303]

    _Edg._ Sweet marjoram.

    _Lear._ Pass.

    _Glou._ I know that voice.                                        95

    _Lear._ Ha! Goneril, with a white beard! They flattered[4304]
    me like a dog, and told me I had white hairs in my[4305]
    beard ere the black ones were there. To say 'ay' and 'no'
    to every thing that I said! 'Ay' and 'no' too was no good[4306]
    divinity. When the rain came to wet me once and the wind[4307]   100
    to make me chatter; when the thunder would not peace at
    my bidding; there I found 'em, there I smelt 'em out. Go[4308]
    to, they are not men o' their words: they told me I was[4309]
    every thing; 'tis a lie, I am not ague-proof.[4310]

    _Glou._ The trick of that voice I do well remember:[4311]        105
    Is't not the king?[4311]

    _Lear._            Ay, every inch a king:[4312][4313]
    When I do stare, see how the subject quakes.[4312][4314]
    I pardon that man's life. What was thy cause?[4312][4315][4316]
    Adultery?[4315][4317][4318]
    Thou shalt not die: die for adultery! No:[4318][4319]            110
    The wren goes to't, and the small gilded fly[4318]
    Does lecher in my sight.[4318][4320]
    Let copulation thrive; for Gloucester's bastard son[4318]
    Was kinder to his father than my daughters[4318][4321]
    Got 'tween the lawful sheets.[4318][4322]                        115
    To't, luxury, pell-mell! for I lack soldiers.[4318]
    Behold yond simpering dame,[4323][4324]
    Whose face between her forks presages snow,[4323][4325]
    That minces virtue and does shake the head[4323][4326]
    To hear of pleasure's name;[4323][4327]                          120
    The fitchew, nor the soiled horse, goes to't[4323][4328]
    With a more riotous appetite.[4323][4328][4329]
    Down from the waist they are Centaurs,[4323][4330]
    Though women all above:[4323]
    But to the girdle do the gods inherit,[4323]                     125
    Beneath is all the fiends';[4331][4332]
    There's hell, there's darkness, there's the sulphurous pit,[4331][4333]
    Burning, scalding, stench, consumption; fie, fie, fie! pah,[4334]
    pah! Give me an ounce of civet, good apothecary, to[4335]
    sweeten my imagination: there's money for thee.[4335]            130

    _Glou._ O, let me kiss that hand!

    _Lear._ Let me wipe it first; it smells of mortality.[4336]

    _Glou._ O ruin'd piece of nature! This great world[4337]
    Shall so wear out to nought. Dost thou know me?[4337][4338]

    _Lear._ I remember thine eyes well enough. Dost thou[4339]       135
    squiny at me? No, do thy worst, blind Cupid; I'll not love.[4340]
    Read thou this challenge; mark but the penning on't.[4341]

    _Glou._ Were all the letters suns, I could not see one.[4342]

    _Edg._ I would not take this from report: it is,[4343]
    And my heart breaks at it.[4343]                                 140

    _Lear._ Read.

    _Glou._ What, with the case of eyes?[4344]

    _Lear._ O, ho, are you there with me? No eyes in your
    head, nor no money in your purse? Your eyes are in a[4345][4346]
    heavy case, your purse in a light: yet you see how this[4345][4347]  145
    world goes.[4348]

    _Glou._ I see it feelingly.

    _Lear._ What, art mad? A man may see how this world[4349]
    goes with no eyes. Look with thine ears: see how yond[4350][4351]
    justice rails upon yond simple thief. Hark, in thine ear:[4351][4352]  150
    change places, and, handy-dandy, which is the justice, which[4353][4354]
    is the thief? Thou hast seen a farmer's dog bark at a[4353]
    beggar?

    _Glou._ Ay, sir.[4355]

    _Lear._ And the creature run from the cur? There thou            155
    mightst behold the great image of authority: a dog's obeyed[4356]
    in office.
    Thou rascal beadle, hold thy bloody hand![4357]
    Why dost thou lash that whore? Strip thine own back;[4357][4358]
    Thou hotly lust'st to use her in that kind[4357][4359]           160
    For which thou whip'st her. The usurer hangs the cozener.[4357][4360]
    Through tatter'd clothes small vices do appear;[4361][4362]
    Robes and furr'd gowns hide all. Plate sin with gold,[4361][4363][4364]
    And the strong lance of justice hurtless breaks;[4361][4364]
    Arm it in rags, a pigmy's straw does pierce it.[4361][4364][4365]  165
    None does offend, none, I say, none; I'll able 'em:[4361][4364][4366]
    Take that of me, my friend, who have the power[4361][4364]
    To seal the accuser's lips. Get thee glass eyes,[4361][4364]
    And, like a scurvy politician, seem[4361]
    To see the things thou dost not.[4361]                           170
    Now, now, now, now: pull off my boots: harder, harder:[4367][4368]
    so.[4368]

    _Edg._ O, matter and impertinency mix'd![4369][4370]
    Reason in madness![4369]

    _Lear._ If thou wilt weep my fortunes, take my eyes.[4371][4372]  175
    I know thee well enough; thy name is Gloucester:[4371]
    Thou must be patient; we came crying hither:[4371]
    Thou know'st, the first time that we smell the air,[4371][4373]
    We wawl and cry. I will preach to thee: mark.[4371][4374]

    _Glou._ Alack, alack the day![4371]                              180

    _Lear._ When we are born, we cry that we are come[4371]
    To this great stage of fools. This 's a good block.[4371][4375]
    It were a delicate stratagem, to shoe[4371][4376]
    A troop of horse with felt: I'll put 't in proof;[4371][4377]
    And when I have stol'n upon these sons-in-law,[4371][4378]       185
    Then, kill, kill, kill, kill, kill, kill![4371]

             _Enter a_ Gentleman, _with_ Attendants.[4379]

    _Gent._ O, here he is: lay hand upon him. Sir,[4371][4380]
    Your most dear daughter--[4371][4381]

    _Lear._ No rescue? What, a prisoner? I am even[4371][4382]
    The natural fool of fortune. Use me well;[4371]                  190
    You shall have ransom. Let me have a surgeon;[4371][4383]
    I am cut to the brains.[4371][4384]

    _Gent._                 You shall have any thing.[4371]

    _Lear._ No seconds? all myself?[4371]
    Why, this would make a man a man of salt,[4371][4385]
    To use his eyes for garden water-pots,[4371][4386]               195
    Ay, and laying autumn's dust.[4371][4387]

    _Gent._ Good sir,--[4371][4387]

    _Lear._ I will die bravely, like a smug bridegroom. What![4371][4387][4388]
    I will be jovial: come, come; I am a king,[4371][4387]
    My masters, know you that.[4371][4387]                           200

    _Gent._ You are a royal one, and we obey you.[4371]

    _Lear._ Then there's life in't. Nay, if you get it, you[4371][4389][4390]
    shall get it by running. Sa, sa, sa, sa.[4371][4389]

                               [_Exit running; Attendants follow._[4391]

    _Gent._ A sight most pitiful in the meanest wretch,[4371]
    Past speaking of in a king! Thou hast one daughter,[4371][4392]  205
    Who redeems nature from the general curse[4371]
    Which twain have brought her to.[4371][4393]

    _Edg._ Hail, gentle sir.

    _Gent._                  Sir, speed you: what's your will?

    _Edg._ Do you hear aught, sir, of a battle toward?[4394]

    _Gent._ Most sure and vulgar: every one hears that,[4395][4396]  210
    Which can distinguish sound.[4395][4397]

    _Edg._                       But, by your favour,[4398]
    How near's the other army?[4398][4399]

    _Gent._ Near and on speedy foot; the main descry[4400]
    Stands on the hourly thought.

    _Edg._                        I thank you, sir: that's all.[4401]

    _Gent._ Though that the queen on special cause is here,          215
    Her army is moved on.

    _Edg._                I thank you, sir.          [_Exit Gent._[4402]

    _Glou._ You ever-gentle gods, take my breath from me;[4403]
    Let not my worser spirit tempt me again
    To die before you please!

    _Edg._                    Well pray you, father.[4404]

    _Glou._ Now, good sir, what are you?                             220

    _Edg._ A most poor man, made tame to fortune's blows;[4405]
    Who, by the art of known and feeling sorrows,[4406]
    Am pregnant to good pity. Give me your hand,
    I'll lead you to some biding.

    _Glou._                       Hearty thanks:[4407]
    The bounty and the benison of heaven[4407][4408]                 225
    To boot, and boot![4407]

                         _Enter_ OSWALD.[4409]

    _Osw._             A proclaim'd prize! Most happy![4410][4411]
    That eyeless head of thine was first framed flesh[4410][4412]
    To raise my fortunes. Thou old unhappy traitor,[4410][4413]
    Briefly thyself remember: the sword is out[4410]
    That must destroy thee.[4410]

    _Glou._                 Now let thy friendly hand[4410][4414]    230
    Put strength enough to't.           [_Edgar interposes._[4410][4415]

    _Osw._                    Wherefore, bold peasant,[4410]
    Darest thou support a publish'd traitor? Hence![4410][4416]
    Lest that the infection of his fortune take[4410][4417]
    Like hold on thee. Let go his arm.[4410]

    _Edg._ Chill not let go, zir, without vurther 'casion.[4418]     235

    _Osw._  Let go, slave, or thou diest!

    _Edg._ Good gentleman, go your gait, and let poor volk[4419]
    pass. An chud ha' been zwaggered out of my life, 'twould[4420]
    not ha' been zo long as 'tis by a vortnight. Nay, come not[4421]
    near th' old man; keep out, che vor ye, or I'se try whether[4422]  240
    your costard or my ballow be the harder: chill be plain[4423]
    with you.

    _Osw._ Out, dunghill!                           [_They fight._[4424]

    _Edg._ Chill pick your teeth, zir: come; no matter vor[4425]
    your foins.                         [_Oswald falls._[4426]       245

    _Osw._ Slave, thou hast slain me. Villain, take my purse:
    If ever thou wilt thrive, bury my body;
    And give the letters which thou find'st about me[4427]
    To Edmund earl of Gloucester; seek him out[4428]
    Upon the British party. O, untimely death![4428][4429][4430]     250
    Death!                                          [_Dies._[4430][4431]

    _Edg._ I know thee well: a serviceable villain,
    As duteous to the vices of thy mistress[4432]
    As badness would desire.

    _Glou._                  What, is he dead?

    _Edg._ Sit you down, father; rest you.[4433][4434][4435]         255
    Let's see these pockets: the letters that he speaks of[4433][4434][4436]
    May be my friends. He's dead; I am only sorry[4433][4437][4438]
    He had no other deathsman. Let us see:[4433][4437]
    Leave, gentle wax; and, manners, blame us not:[4433][4439][4440]
    To know our enemies' minds, we'ld rip their hearts;[4440][4441]  260
    Their papers, is more lawful.[4442]

    [_Reads_] 'Let our reciprocal vows be remembered. You[4443][4444][4445]
    have many opportunities to cut him off: if your will want[4444]
    not, time and place will be fruitfully offered. There is[4444]
    nothing done, if he return the conqueror: then am I[4444][4446]  265
    the prisoner, and his bed my gaol; from the loathed[4444][4447]
    warmth whereof deliver me, and supply the place for your[4444][4448]
    labour.

          'Your--wife, so I would say--affectionate servant,[4449]
                                           'GONERIL.'                270
    O undistinguish'd space of woman's will![4450]
    A plot upon her virtuous husband's life;
    And the exchange my brother! Here, in the sands,[4451]
    Thee I'll rake up, the post unsanctified[4452]
    Of murderous lechers; and in the mature time[4453]               275
    With this ungracious paper strike the sight
    Of the death-practised duke: for him 'tis well[4454]
    That of thy death and business I can tell.[4455]

    _Glou._ The king is mad: how stiff is my vile sense,[4456]
    That I stand up, and have ingenious feeling                      280
    Of my huge sorrows! Better I were distract:
    So should my thoughts be sever'd from my griefs,[4457]
    And woes by wrong imaginations lose[4458]
    The knowledge of themselves.                 [_Drum afar off._[4459]

    _Edg._                       Give me your hand:[284, 285]
    Far off, methinks, I hear the beaten drum:[4460]                 285
    Come, father, I'll bestow you with a friend.        [_Exeunt._[4461]


SCENE VII. _A tent in the French camp._ LEAR _on a bed asleep, soft
music playing_; Gentleman, _and others attending_.

              _Enter_ CORDELIA, KENT, _and_ Doctor.[4462]

    _Cor._ O thou good Kent, how shall I live and work,[4463]
    To match thy goodness? My life will be too short,[4463][4464]
    And every measure fail me.[4463]

    _Kent._ To be acknowledged, madam, is o'erpaid.[4465]
    All my reports go with the modest truth,                           5
    Nor more nor clipp'd, but so.

    _Cor._                        Be better suited:[4466]
    These weeds are memories of those worser hours:[4466]
    I prithee, put them off.[4466]

    _Kent._                  Pardon me, dear madam;[4467]
    Yet to be known shortens my made intent:[4468]
    My boon I make it, that you know me not                           10
    Till time and I think meet.

    _Cor._ Then be't so, my good lord. [_To the Doctor_]
                How does the king?[4469]

    _Doct._ Madam, sleeps still.[4470][4471]

    _Cor._ O you kind gods,[4472][4473]
    Cure this great breach in his abused nature![4473]                15
    The untuned and jarring senses, O, wind up[4474]
    Of this child-changed father!

    _Doct._                       So please your majesty[4470][4475][4476]
    That we may wake the king: he hath slept long.[4476][4477]

    _Cor._ Be govern'd by your knowledge, and proceed
    I' the sway of your own will. Is he array'd?[4478]                20

    _Gent._ Ay, madam; in the heaviness of his sleep[4479]
    We put fresh garments on him.

    _Doct._ Be by, good madam, when we do awake him;[4480]
    I doubt not of his temperance.[4481]

    _Cor._                         Very well.[4482]

    _Doct._ Please you, draw near. Louder the music there![4482]      25

    _Cor._ O my dear father! Restoration hang[4483][4484]
    Thy medicine on my lips, and let this kiss[4483][4485]
    Repair those violent harms that my two sisters[4483]
    Have in thy reverence made![4483]

    _Kent._                     Kind and dear princess![4486]

    _Cor._ Had you not been their father, these white flakes[4487]    30
    Had challenged pity of them. Was this a face[4488]
    To be opposed against the warring winds?[4489]
    To stand against the deep dread-bolted thunder?[4490][4491]
    In the most terrible and nimble stroke[4490]
    Of quick, cross lightning? to watch--poor perdu!--[4490][4492]    35
    With this thin helm? Mine enemy's dog,[4490][4493][4494][4495]
    Though he had bit me, should have stood that night[4494]
    Against my fire; and wast thou fain, poor father,[4494]
    To hovel thee with swine and rogues forlorn,
    In short and musty straw? Alack, alack![4496]                     40
    'Tis wonder that thy life and wits at once[4497]
    Had not concluded all. He wakes; speak to him.[4498]

    _Doct._ Madam, do you; 'tis fittest.[4499]

    _Cor._ How does my royal lord? How fares your majesty?[4500]

    _Lear._ You do me wrong to take me out o' the grave:[4501]        45
    Thou art a soul in bliss; but I am bound
    Upon a wheel of fire, that mine own tears
    Do scald like molten lead.

    _Cor._                     Sir, do you know me?[4502]

    _Lear._ You are a spirit, I know: when did you die?[4503]

    _Cor._ Still, still, far wide!                                    50

    _Doct._ He's scarce awake: let him alone awhile.[4504]

    _Lear._ Where have I been? Where am I? Fair daylight?[4504]
    I am mightily abused. I should e'en die with pity,[4505]
    To see another thus. I know not what to say.[4506]
    I will not swear these are my hands: let's see;                   55
    I feel this pin prick. Would I were assured[4507]
    Of my condition![4507]

    _Cor._           O, look upon me, sir,[4508][4509]
    And hold your hands in benediction o'er me.[4508][4510]
    No, sir, you must not kneel.[4508]

    _Lear._                      Pray, do not mock me:[4511]
    I am a very foolish fond old man,                                 60
    Fourscore and upward, not an hour more nor less;[4512]
    And, to deal plainly,[4513]
    I fear I am not in my perfect mind.[4514]
    Methinks I should know you and know this man;
    Yet I am doubtful; for I am mainly ignorant[4515]                 65
    What place this is, and all the skill I have
    Remembers not these garments, nor I know not[4516]
    Where I did lodge last night. Do not laugh at me;[4517]
    For, as I am a man, I think this lady
    To be my child Cordelia.

    _Cor._                   And so I am, I am.[4518]                 70

    _Lear._ Be your tears wet? yes, faith. I pray, weep not:[4519]
    If you have poison for me, I will drink it.
    I know you do not love me; for your sisters
    Have, as I do remember, done me wrong:[4520]
    You have some cause, they have not.[4521]

    _Cor._                              No cause, no cause.           75

    _Lear._ Am I in France?

    _Kent._                 In your own kingdom, sir.

    _Lear._ Do not abuse me.[4522]

    _Doct._ Be comforted, good madam: the great rage,[4523]
    You see, is kill'd in him: and yet it is danger[4523][4524][4525][4526]
    To make him even o'er the time he has lost.[4523][4525][4527]     80
    Desire him to go in; trouble him no more[4523][4528]
    Till further settling.[4523]

    _Cor._ Will't please your highness walk?[4529]

    _Lear._ You must bear with me. Pray you now, forget[4530]
    and forgive: I am old and foolish.[4530]                          85

                             [_Exeunt all but Kent and Gentleman._[4531]

    _Gent._ Holds it true, sir, that the Duke of Cornwall[4532][4533][4534]
    was so slain?[4532][4533]

    _Kent._ Most certain, sir.[4532][4533]

    _Gent._ Who is conductor of his people?[4532][4533]

    _Kent._ As 'tis said, the bastard son of Gloucester.[4532][4533][4535]  90

    _Gent._ They say Edgar, his banished son, is with the[4532][4533]
    Earl of Kent in Germany.[4532][4533][4536]

    _Kent._ Report is changeable. 'Tis time to look about;[4532][4536][4537]
    the powers of the kingdom approach apace.[4532][4536][4537]

    _Gent._ The arbitrement is like to be bloody. Fare
        you[4532][4536][4537][4538]                                   95
    well, sir.                          [_Exit._[4532][4536][4537][4539]

    _Kent._ My point and period will be throughly wrought,[4532]
    Or well or ill, as this day's battle's fought.  [_Exit._[4532][4540]

FOOTNOTES:

[3996] The heath.] Capell. An open Country. Rowe.

[3997] _Yet_] _Yes,_ Collier (Collier MS.)

_and known_] _unknown_ Collier, ed. 2 (Johnson conj.)

[3998] _flatter'd. To be worst,_] Pope. _flattered to be worst,_ Qq.
_flatter'd, to be worst:_ Ff. _flatter'd to be worse._ Tyrwhitt conj.

[3999] _and_] om. Pope.

_dejected_] _deject_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[4000] _esperance_] Ff. _experience_ Qq.

[4001] _laughter._] Ff. _laughter,_ Qq.

[4002] _Welcome ... blasts._] Omitted in Qq.

[4003] _thy_] _my_ Rowe.

_But ... here?_] Ff. _Who's here,_ Qq.

[4004] _But ... world!_] Divided as in Capell. Two lines, the first
ending _led?_ in Ff. One line in Qq.

[4005] Enter Gloucester, led by an Old Man.] Qq, after _age_, line 12.
Transferred by Pope to follow _blasts_, line 9. Enter Glouster, and an
Oldman. F₁ F₂, after _blasts_. Enter Gloster led by an old man. F₃ F₄,
after _blasts_.

[4006] _poorly led?_] F₃ F₄. _poorely led?_ F₁ F₂. _poorely led,_ Q₁
Q₃. _poorlie, leed,_ Q₂ (Cap. Dev. Mus. imp. and Bodl. 1). _parti,
eyd_, Q₂ (Mus. per. and Bodl. 2).

[4007] _hate,_] _wait_ Theobald. _bate_ Sewel conj.

[4008] _Life would not_] _Life would ill_ or _Loath should we_ or _Life
would not but reluctant_ Hanmer conj. MS. See note (XVII).

[4009] _O, my ..._] Prose in Qq. Two lines, the first ending _your
tenant,_ in Ff. Three lines, ending _lord, ... father's tenant ...
years,_ in Johnson.

[4010] _these fourscore years._] _this fourescore--_ Q₁ Q₃. _this
forescore--_ Q₂.

[4011] _Alack, sir,_] Qq. om. Ff.

[4012] _Our means secure_] F₃ F₄. _Our meanes secure_ Qq F₁ F₂. _Our
mean secures_ Pope. _Our means ensnare_ Theobald conj. (withdrawn).
_Meanness secures_ Hanmer. _Our means seduce_ or _Our maims secure_
Johnson conj. _Our means recuse_ Brae conj. _Our wants secure_ Collier
(Collier MS.) _Our meanness succours_ Hunter conj. _Our needs secure_
Singer (ed. 2). _Our means secures_ Arrowsmith conj. _Our harms secure_
Jervis conj.

[4013] _Ah_] Qq. _Oh_ Ff.

[4014] _Who's_] _whose_ Q₂.

[4015] [Aside] Johnson.

[4016] _I am at the_] Qq F₁ F₃ F₄. _I am at_ F₂. _I'm at the_ Pope.

[4017] _I am_] _I'm_ Pope.

_e'er_] Rowe. _ere_ Qq Ff.

[4018] _So long_] _As long_ Qq.

[4019] _He_] _A_ Q₂.

[4020] _I' the_] _In the_ Qq.

[4021] _Was ... since._] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_I have_] _I've_ Pope.

[4022] _to wanton_] F₁ F₂. _to th' wanton_ F₃ F₄. _are to'th wanton_ Q₁
Q₃. _are toth' wanton_ Q₂.

[4023] _kill_] _bit_ Q₁ Q₃. _bitt_ Q₂. _bite_ Anon. MS. See note (V).
_hit_ Delius conj.

[4024] _How ... master!_] As in Ff. Prose in Qq.

[4025] _this_] _their_ F₂.

[4026] _that must play fool to_] F₁. _that must play the foole to_ Qq.
_that must play to foole_ F₂. _that must play the fool to_ F₃ F₄. _Must
play the fool to_ Pope.

[4027] _Angering itself_] _Anguishing't self_ Hanmer. _Ang'ishing it
self_ Warburton.

[4028] _Then ... gone_] Qq. (_gon_ Q₂). _Get thee away_ Ff.

[4029] _hence_] _here_ Qq.

[4030] _toward_] Q₂ Ff. _to_ Q₁ Q₃.

[4031] _this_] _his_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[4032] _Who_] Qq. _Which_ Ff. _Whom_ Pope.

[4033] _'Tis ... blind._] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_times'_] Capell. _times_ Qq Ff. _time's_ Rowe.

[4034] _thee_] om. Pope.

[4035] _'parel_] _'parrel_ Rowe. _parrell_ Qq F₁ F₂ F₃. _parrel_ F₄.

[4036] [Exit.] Ff. om. Qq.

[4037] _Sirrah,_] _Sirrah, you_ Hanmer. _Sirrah, thou_ Keightley.

_fellow,--_] Capell. _fellow._ Qq Ff.

[4038] _daub it_] _dance it_ Qq. _dally_ Hanmer.

_further_] _farther_ Qq.

[4039] _And yet I must._] Omitted in Qq.

_And ... bleed._] One line in Capell. Two in Ff.

[4040] _Both ... fiend!_] Prose in Ff. Three lines in Qq.

[4041] _scared_] _scard_ Qq. _scarr'd_ F₁ F₂. _scar'd_ F₃ F₄.

[4042] _thee, good man's son,_] _the good man_ Qq. _thee, good man,_
Pope.

[4043] _Five ... master!_] As prose by Pope. Five lines in Qq. Omitted
in Ff.

[4044] _at once_] _in once_ Capell (corrected in Errata).

_of lust, as Obidicut;_] Omitted by Pope. _as Obidicut, of lust;_ S.
Walker conj.

_Hobbididence_] Qq. _Hobbididen_ Pope. _Hobbididdance_ Capell.

[4045] _dumbness_] _darkness_ Capell (corrected in Errata).

_Modo_] _Mohu_ Pope.

_Flibbertigibbet_] Pope. _Stiberdigebit_ Qq. and _Flibbertigibbet_
Theobald.

[4046] _mopping and mowing;_] Theobald. _Mobing, and Mohing_ Q₁ Q₃.
_Mobing, & Mohing_ Q₂ (_Mohing_ in italics in all). _moping, and
Mowing_ Pope (_Mowing_ in italics).

[4047] _So ... master!_] Omitted by Pope.

[4048] _heavens'_] _heaven's_ Hanmer.

_plagues_] _plagues._ Q₂.

[4049] _Have ... Makes thee_] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

[4050] _and_] _and the_ Rowe.

_lust-dieted_] _lust-dieting_ Capell.

[4051] _slaves_] Ff. _stands_ Qq. _braves_ Hanmer (Warburton). _staves_
Jackson conj. _slights_ Anon. conj.

[4052] _doth_] Q₁ Q₃. _does_ Q₂. _do's_ Ff.

[4053] _undo_] F₃ F₄. _undoo_ F₁. _undoe_ F₂. _under_ Qq.

[4054] _fearfully_] _firmely_ Q₁ Q₂. _firmly_ Q₃.

_in_] _on_ Rowe.

[4055] _With ... need._] As in Ff. The first line ends _me,_ in Qq.

[4056] _I shall_] _shall I_ Q₁ Q₃.

_leading_] _lending_ F₃ F₄.

[4057] _Give ... thee._] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

[4058] [Exeunt.] Ff. om. Qq.

[4059] Before....] The Duke of Albany's Palace. Rowe. Before Albany's
Palace. Capell. A Courtyard of the Duke of Albany's Palace. Eccles conj.

Enter....] Enter Gonorill and Bastard. Qq. Enter Gonerill, Bastard, and
Steward. Ff. Enter Goneril, and Edmund; Steward meeting them. Capell.

[4060] Enter Oswald] Enter Steward. Theobald. Enter Steward. Qq (after
_master?_).

[4061] _Madam ... offensive._] Arranged as in Ff. Prose in Qq.

[4062] _most ... dislike_] _hee should most desire_ Qq. _hee should
most dislike_ Anon. MS. See note (V).

[4063] [To Edm.] Hanmer.

_shall you_] _thou shalt_ Jennens.

[4064] _terror_] Ff. _terrer_ Q₂ (Mus. per. and Bodl. 2). _curre_ Q₁ Q₂
(Cap. Dev. Mus. imp. and Bodl. 1) Q₃.

[4065] _Our ... Edmund, to_] _that our wishes On th' way may prove
effects, back, to_ Hanmer.

[4066] _Edmund_] _Edgar_ Q₂.

[4067] _arms_] _armes_ Qq. _names_ Ff.

[4068] _ere ... hear_] _you ere long shall hear_ Pope.

[4069] _venture_] Q₂ Ff. _venter_ Q₁ Q₃.

[4070] _command_] Q₂ (Mus. per. and Bodl. 2) Ff. _coward_ Q₁ Q₂ (Cap.
Dev. Mus. imp. and Bodl. 1) Q₃.

_this; spare_] Ff. _this, spare_ Q₂ (Mus. per. and Bodl. 2). _this
spare_ Q₁ Q₂ (Cap. Dev. Mus. imp. and Bodl. 1) Q₃.

[Giving a favour.] Johnson. Gives him a ring. Hanmer. om. Qq Ff.

[4071] _fare thee well_] Ff. _faryewell_ Q₁ Q₃. _far you well_ Q₂.

[4072] _My ... man!_] One line in Keightley.

[4073] [Exit Edmund.] Exit Bastard. Rowe. Exit. Ff (after _death_). om.
Qq.

[4074] _O, ... man!_] Omitted in Qq, which read _My ... due_ as one
line.

_O,_] om. Seymour conj. In a separate line, S. Walker conj., ending
lines 26-28 with Steevens (1793). _But O,_ transposing lines 26, 27.
Anon. conj.

_difference_] _strange difference_ Pope.

[4075] The lines end _thee ... fool_ in Steevens (1793).

[4076] _a_] Ff Q₂ (Mus. per. and Bodl. 2). om. Q₁ Q₂ (Cap. Dev. Mus.
imp. and Bodl. 1) Q₃.

[4077] _My fool ... body._] F₃ F₄. _My foole usurpes my body._ F₁ F₂.
_My foote ... head._ Q₁. _My foote ... body._ Q₂ (Cap. Dev. Mus. imp.
and Bodl. 1). _A foole ... bed._ Q₂ (Mus. per. and Bodl. 2). _My
foot ... head._ Q₃. _My fool ... bed._ Malone.

[Exit.] Exit Steward. Qq om. Ff.

Enter Albany.] Ff. Enter the Duke of Albeney. Q₁ Q₃. om. Q₂.

[4078] _whistle_] _whistling_ Q₂ (Mus. per. and Bodl. 2).

[4079] _O ... wind_] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

[4080] _rude_] om. Q₁ Q₃.

[4081] _I fear ... deep._] Omitted in Ff.

[4082] _its_] Q₃. _it_ Q₁ Q₂ (Cap. Dev. Mus. imp. and Bodl. 1). _ith_
Q₂ (Mus. per. and Bodl. 2).

[4083] _border'd_] Pope. _bordered_ Qq. _order'd_ Bailey conj.

[4084] _sliver_] _shiver_ Pope. _silver_ Jennens (a misprint).

[4085] _material_] _maternal_ Theobald.

[4086] _the text is_] _tis_ Pope.

[4087] _Filths ... done?_] Omitted by Pope.

[4088] _Whose ... lick_,] Omitted by Pope.

_reverence ... bear_] _reverend head the rugged bear_ Capell.

_even_] Q₂. om. Q₁ Q₃.

[4089] _benefited_] _benifited_ Q₂ (Mus. per. and Bodl. 2).
_beneflicted_ Q₁ Q₃. _beniflicted_ Q₂ (Cap. Dev. Mus. imp. and Bodl. 1).

After this Warburton conjectures that there is an omission of a line or
two.

[4090] _Send ... come,_] Arranged as in Malone. One line in Qq.

[4091] _these vile_] Jennens. _this vild_ Q₂ (Mus. per. and Bodl. 2).
_the vilde_ Q₁ Q₃. _the vild_ Q₂ (Cap. Dev. Mus. imp. and Bodl. 1).

[4092] _It will come,_] Omitted by Pope. _'Twill come,_ Jennens,
reading _'Twill ... prey on_ as one line. _'Twill come,_ in a separate
line, Steevens (1793).

[4093] _Humanity ... deep._] Arranged as in Pope. One line in Qq.

[4094] _Humanity_] Q₂ (Mus. per. and Bodl. 2). _Humanly_ Q₁ Q₂ (Cap.
Dev. Mus. imp. and Bodl. 1) Q₃. _that humanity_ Keightley, reading
_It ... deep_ as two lines, the first ending _perforce._

[4095] _bear'st_] Ff. _bearest_ Qq.

[4096] _Who ... honour_] Arranged as in Ff. One line in Qq.

[4097] _not_] _now_ Grant White.

_eye discerning_] Rowe. _eye-discerning_ Ff. _eie deserving_ Q₁. _eye
deserving_ Q₂ Q₃.

[4098] _that ... so?_] Arranged as by Theobald. The first three lines
end _pity ... mischiefe, ... noiselesse,_ in Q₁ Q₃. They end _pitty ...
mischiefe, ... land,_ in Q₂. Omitted in Ff.

[4099] _know'st Fools do_] _know'st, Fools do_ Theobald, _know'st
fooles, do_ Q₁. _know'st fools, do_ Q₂ (Cap. Dev. Mus. imp. and Bodl.
1) Q₃. _know'st, fools do_ Q₂ (Mus. per. and Bodl. 2).

[4100] _those_] Q₂. _these_ Q₁ Q₃.

[4101] _noiseless_] _noystles_ Q₂ (Cap. Dev. Mus. imp. and Bodl. 1).
_noyseles_ Q₂ (Mus. per. and Bodl. 2).

[4102] _plumed_] _a plumed_ Q₃.

_thy state begins to threat_] Staunton (Eccles conj.) _thy state begins
thereat_ Q₂ (Mus. per. and Bodl. 2). _thy slaier begins threats_ Q₁ Q₃.
_thy slayer begin threats_ Q₂ (Cap. Dev. Mus. imp. and Bodl. 1). _thy
slayer begins his threats_ Theobald. _the slayer begins his threats_
Hanmer.

[4103] _Whiles_] Q₁ Q₃. _Whil's_ Q₂ (Cap. Dev. Mus. imp. and Bodl. 1).
_Whil'st_ Q₂ (Mus. per. and Bodl. 2).

_moral_] _mortall_ Q₃.

_sit'st ... criest_] _sit'st ... cry'st_ Theobald, _sits ... cries_ Qq.

[4104] _See ... woman._] As in Ff. Prose in Qq.

[4105] _deformity_] _deformiry_ Q₁ Q₃.

_seems_] _shewes_ Q₂ (Mus. per. and Bodl. 2).

[4106] _Thou ... mew_] Omitted in Ff.

[4107] _changed_] Q₂. _chang'd_ Q₁ Q₃.

_self-cover'd_] _self-converted_ Theobald. _self-convict_ Becket conj.
_self-govern'd_ Collier conj. _self-discover'd_ Cartwright conj.

[4108] _Were't_] _Were it_ Capell.

[4109] Keightley ends the lines _feature ... blood ... tear,_ reading
_Were it._

[4110] _To_] _As man to_ Anon. conj.

_hands_] _hands of mine_ Anon. conj.

_blood_] _boiling blood_ Theobald. _blood's behest_ Anon. conj.

[4111] _They are_] _They're_ Theobald.

_dislocate_] Q₃. _dislecate_ Q₁ Q₂. _dissecate_ Anon. MS. See note (V).

[4112] _howe'er_] Theobald, _how ere_ Qq.

[4113] _manhood mew._] Edd. _manhood mew--_ Q₂ (Mus. per. and Bodl. 2).
_man-hood now--_ Q₁ Q₃. _manhood now--_ Q₂ (Cap. Dev. Mus. imp. and
Bodl. 1). _manhood now!--_ Theobald.

Enter a Messenger.] Ff, after _foole,_ line 61. Enter a Gentleman. Q₁
Q₃. Enter a Gentleman (after _news?_) Q₂.

[4114] Alb. _What news?_] Omitted in Ff.

[4115] Mess.] Mes. Ff. Gent. Qq.

[4116] _O ... Gloucester._] Arranged as in Ff. Prose in Qq.

[4117] _thrill'd_] Ff. _thrald_ Qq.

[4118] _against ... his sword To_] _the act, bending aside the sword
Of_ Eccles conj.

[4119] _thereat enraged_] _threat-enrag'd_ F₁.

[4120] _fell'd him_] _fell he_ Capell conj.

[4121] _not_] _now_ Warburton (a misprint).

[4122] _which ... after._] As in Q₂ Ff. One line in Q₁ Q₃.

[4123] _This ... eye?_] Arranged as in Ff. Three lines, ending
_Iustisers_ (or _Iustices_) _... venge ... eye?_ in Qq.

[4124] _above, You justicers_] Steevens, 1778 (Capell conj.) _above
you Iustisers_ Q₂ (Mus. per. and Bodl. 2). _above your Iustices_ Q₁ Q₂
(Cap. Dev. Mus. imp. and Bodl. 1) Q₃. _above You Justices_ Ff.

[4125] _nether_] _neather_ Q₁ F₁ Q₃.

[4126] _Both ... sister._] As in Ff. Two lines in Qq the first ending
_speedy_ in Q₁ Q₃, and _answer_ in Q₂.

[4127] [Aside] Johnson.

[4128] _being_] _she being_ Keightley.

[4129] _in_] Ff. _on_ Qq. _of_ Capell conj.

[4130] _Upon ... tart_] Ff. _Upon ... tooke,_ Qq (in one line).

[4131] [Exit.] Qq. om. Ff.

[4132] _Where ... eyes?_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[4133] _He is_] _He's_ Pope.

[4134] _on purpose_] Qq F₁ F₂. _of purpose_ F₃ F₄.

_their_] _there_ Q₂.

[4135] _Gloucester ... eyes._] Marked as 'Aside' by Johnson.

[4136] _Gloucester ... know'st._] Arranged as in Ff. Three lines in Qq,
the first two ending _love ... eyes;_ in Q₁ Q₃, and _king, ... friend,_
in Q₂.

[4137] _show'dst_] _shew'dst_ F₁ F₃ F₄. _shewdst_ F₂. _shewedst_ Qq.

[4138] _thine_] Ff. _thy_ Qq.

[4139] _know'st_] F₁ F₃ F₄. _knowst_ F₂. _knowest_ Qq.

[Exeunt.] Ff. Exit. Qq.

[4140] SCENE III.] Pope. The whole of this Scene is omitted in Ff and
Rowe. SCENE IV. Eccles, who here inserts SCENE V.

The French....] Steevens. French Camp under Dover. Capell. om. Pope.
Dover. Theobald.

[4141] _Why ... back_] _The King of France so suddenly gone back!_ Pope.

_Why ... reason?_] Prose in Q₂. Two lines, the first ending _backe,_ in
Q₁ Q₃.

[4142] _the_] Q₁ Q₃. _no_ Q₂.

[4143] _Something ... necessary_] As in Qq. Four lines, ending
_state, ... which ... danger, ... necessary._ in Pope.

[4144] _to_] om. Pope.

[4145] _personal_] om. Pope.

[4146] _Who_] _Whom_ Warburton.

[4147] _Marshal_] _Mareschal_ Pope.

_La Far_] Qq. _le Far_ Pope. _le Fer_ Capell.

[4148] _Did ... of grief?_] _Well; say, sir, did ... of her grief?_
Capell, reading as two lines of verse. _But tell me, did ... of grief?_
Seymour conj.

[4149] _Ay, sir;_] _I, sir,_ Theobald. _I say_ Qq.

_them ... them_] _'em ... 'em_ Pope.

[4150] _Her ... her._] As in Pope. Two lines, the first ending
_passion,_ in Qq.

[4151] _Over_] _over_ Q₂. _ore_ Q₁ Q₃.

_who_] _which_ Pope.

[4152] _Not to a rage_] _Not to rage_ Q₃. _But not to rage_ Pope.

_strove_] Pope. _streme_ Qq.

[4153] _Who_] _Which_ Pope.

[4154] _her ... way:_] Omitted by Pope.

[4155] _like_] _linked_ Jackson conj.

_a better way:_] _a better way,_ Q₁ Q₃. _a better way_ Q₂. _a wetter
May._ Theobald (Warburton). _an April day._ Heath conj. _a better day._
Steevens. _a better May:_ Malone. _a chequer'd day._ Dodd conj. _the
better day._ Becket conj. _like; a better way._ Singer (Boaden conj.)
_a bitter May._ Lloyd conj. _'em;--a better way._ Keightley.

_happy_] _happiest_ Pope (ed. 2).

_smilets_] _smiles_ Pope.

[4156] _seem'd_] Pope, _seeme_ Qq.

[4157] _As pearls ... it._] As in Qq. Capell, reading _In brief, sir,_
ends the lines at _sorrow ... all ... it._ Steevens (1778), omitting
_sir,_ follows Capell's arrangement.

[4158] _dropp'd_] _dropping_ Steevens conj.

[4159] _question_] _quests_ Hanmer. _quest_ Warburton.

[4160] _Faith,_] om. Pope, ending line 24 at _twice._ _Yes,_ Theobald.

[4161] _Shame ... father! sisters!_] Omitted by Pope.

[4162] In Q₁ Q₃ _Kent_ is printed in italics with full stop.

_Kent!... What_] Ken. _Father Sisters_ Gen. _What_ Capell.

_storm? i' the night_] _storme ith night_ Qq. _storm of night_ Pope.

[4163] _pity not be believed_] _pitty not be beleev'd_ Q₁ Q₃. _pitie
not be beleeft_ Q₂. _pity ne'er believe it_ Pope. _it not be believed_
Capell. _pity not believe it_ Jennens.

_There_] Then Pope.

[4164] _And clamour moisten'd:_] Capell. _And clamour moistened
her,_ Qq. _And, clamour-motion'd,_ Theobald. _And clamour motion'd
her._ Becket conj. _And, clamour-moisten'd,_ Grant White. _And
clamour-moistened:_ S. Walker conj. _And clamour softend:_ Cartwright
conj. _And choler masterd her:_ Anon. conj.

_And ... started_] _And then retired_ Pope, reading _And ... alone_ as
one line.

[4165] _It is the stars,_] Omitted by Pope.

[4166] _It ... conditions:_] Arranged as by Theobald. One line in Qq.

[4167] _self mate_] _self-mate_ Pope. _and mate_] Q₁ Q₃. _and make_ Q₂.

[4168] _You spoke not_] _Spoke you_ Pope.

_since?_] Q₁ Q₃. _since._ Q₂.

[4169] _Well, sir_] om. Pope.

_Lear's i' the_] _Lear's ith_ Qq. _Lears in_ Pope. _Lear is i the_
Capell. _Lear is in_ Hanmer.

[4170] _sometime_] Q₁ Q₃. _some time_ Q₂. _sometimes_ Pope.

_tune_] _lune_ Becket conj.

[4171] _What ... daughter._] Arranged as by Pope. One line in Qq.

[4172] _so elbows him: his own_] _so so bows him, his_ Pope. _so bows
him: his own_ Capell. _so awes him, his own_ Seymour conj. _soul-bows
him: his own_ Jackson conj. _so embows his own_ Badham conj. _sole bars
him: his own_ Bailey conj.

[4173] _from his_] _from her_ Johnson (1771).

[4174] _To ... Cordelia_] Arranged as by Johnson. Two lines, the first
ending _minde,_ in Qq.

[4175] _sting His mind_] _sting him_ Pope, ending the lines _him ...
him ... Cordelia._

[4176] _from_] _From his_ Pope.

[4177] _not?_] Q₁ Q₃. _not._ Q₂.

[4178] _so;_] _so,_ Pope. _so_ Qq. _said_ Warburton. _so deliver'd me:_
Seymour conj.

_afoot_] Q₃. _afoote_ Q₁. _a foote_ Q₂.

[4179] _Lending ... me._] Arranged as by Steevens (1778). One line in
Qq. Two lines, the first ending _acquaintance,_ in Delius.

_I ... Along_] _Pray along_ Pope, reading _Lending ... with me_ as one
line. _Pray you, along_ Capell, reading as one line.

[4180] [Exeunt.] Pope. Exit. Qq.

[4181] SCENE IV.] Pope. Scena Tertia. Ff. SCENE V. Eccles.

The same. A tent.] Capell. A Camp. Rowe. A tent in the Camp at Dover.
Steevens (1773).

Enter....] Enter ... Cordelia, Gentlemen, and Souldiours. Ff. Enter
Cordelia, Doctor, and others. Qq. Enter Cordelia, Physician, and
Soldiers. Pope.

[4182] _mad as_] _made_ F₃ F₄.

_vex'd_] _vext_ Ff. _vent_ Qq.

[4183] _fumiter_] _fumiterr_ Theobald, _femiter_ Qq. _Femitar_ Ff.
_fumitory_ Hanmer.

_furrow-weeds_] _farrow weeds_ Boucher conj.

[4184] _bur-docks_] Hanmer. _hor-docks_ Qq. _Hardokes_ F₁ F₂.
_Hardocks_ F₃ F₄. _harlocks_ Steevens, 1778 (Farmer conj.) _charlocks_
Anon. conj. (Gent. Mag. LVI. 214). _hoar-docks_ Collier, _hediokes_
Nicholson conj.

_nettles_] _nettle_ Johnson.

[4185] _sustaining corn._] _sustaining, Corne,_ Q₁ Q₃. _sustayning,
corne,_ Q₂.

_A ... forth;_] _Send forth a cent'ry:_ Pope.

_century_] Q₁ Q₃ F₃ F₄. _centurie_ Q₂. _centery_ F₁ F₂. _sen'try_
Johnson.

_send_] Ff. _is sent_ Qq.

[4186] _And ... worth._] Arranged as by Pope. The lines end _wisedome
do ... helpe him ... worth_ in Q₁ Q₃. They end _wisdome ... helpe
him ... worth_ in Q₂. They end _wisedome ... helpes him ... worth_
in Ff. Four lines, ending _eye ... restoring ... him, ... worth,_ in
Capell.

[4187] _our eye_] _us_ Seymour conj.

[Exit....] Malone. To an Officer, who goes out. Capell. om. Qq Ff.

[4188] _What ... sense?_] _Do, what man's wisdom can, In ... sense._
Boswell conj.

[4189] _man's_] om. Seymour conj.

[4190] _In_] _do In_ Q₁ Q₃. _do, in_ Capell.

_his_] _Of his_ Capell.

[4191] _helps_] _can helpe_ Qq.

[4192] Doct.] Qq. Gent. Ff.

_is_] _are_ Rowe.

[4193] _lacks: that_] F₃ F₄. _lackes: that_ F₁ F₂. _lackes, that_ Q₁
Q₃. _lackes that_ Q₂.

[4194] _All ... earth,_] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

[4195] _remediate_] _remediant_ Johnson.

[4196] _distress_] _distresse_ Qq. _desires_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _desire_ F₄.

[4197] Enter a Messenger.] Q₁ Ff Q₃. Enter Messenger. Q₂.

[4198] _News ... hitherward._] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

[4199] _It ... France_] Arranged as by Johnson. One line in Qq Ff.

[4200] _mourning and_] om. Hanmer, reading _Therefore ... pitied_ as
one line.

_important_] Qq. _importun'd_ Ff. _importunate_ Capell.

[4201] _incite_] Ff. _insite_ Q₁ Q₃. _in sight_ Q₂.

[4202] _and our aged_] _to our dear_ Johnson (1771).

_right_] Qq F₃ F₄. _Rite_ F₁ F₂.

[4203] _Soon ... him!_] om. Seymour conj.

[Exeunt.] Ff. Exit. Qq. om. Jennens.

[4204] SCENE V.] Pope. Scena Quarta Ff. SCENE III. Eccles, who
transfers it to follow SCENE II.

Gloucester's castle.] A room in Gloster's Castle. Capell. Regan's
Palace. Rowe.

Oswald.] Steward Qq Ff.

[4205] _But ... Himself_] Marked as one line in Capell MS.

[4206] _there_] Ff. om. Qq.

_Madam,_] om. Pope.

[4207] _Madam ... soldier._] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

[4208] _sister is_] Q₂ Ff. _sister's_ Q₁ Q₃.

[4209] _lord_] Ff. _lady_ Qq.

[4210] _letter_] _letters_ Q₂.

[4211] _serious_] Q₂ Ff. _a serious_ Q₁ Q₃.

[4212] _Edmund_] Ff. _and now_ Qq.

[4213] _In ... enemy._] _In ... army._ Qq, in two lines, the first
ending _life._

[4214] _o' the enemy_] _o' th' Enemy_ F₁. _oth' Enemy_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _of
the Army_ Q₁ Q₃. _at'h army_ Q₂.

[4215] _madam_] om. Qq.

_letter_] Ff. _letters_ Qq.

[4216] _troops set_] F₃ F₄. _troopes set_ F₁ F₂. _troope sets_ Qq.

[4217] _I may ... business._] As in Ff. Prose in Qq.

[4218] _Might ... Belike_,] Arranged as in Qq. One line in Ff.

[4219] _by word? Belike_,] Ff. _by word, belike_ Qq. _by word?_ Pope.
_by word of mouth?_ Hanmer.

[4220] _Something--_] Pope. _Something,_ Qq. _Some things,_ Ff.

[4221] _I had_] Ff. _Ide_ Q₁ Q₃. _I'de_ Q₂.

[4222] _I am_] _I'm_ Pope.

[4223] _gave strange_] _gave_ Warburton (in text). _gave him_ Warburton
(in note).

_œillades_] _aliads_ Qq. _Eliads_ F₁. _Iliads_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _œiliads_
Rowe. _eylids_ Anon. MS. See note (V).

[4224] _you are_] _you're_ Pope.

[4225] _madam?_] Ff. _madam._ Qq.

[4226] _you are; I know't_] Rowe (ed. 2). _Y'are: I know't_ Ff. _for
I know't_ Qq. _you're; I know't_ Rowe (ed. 1). _you are, I know it_
Capell.

[4227] _this note:_] _note of this_, Grey conj.

[4228] _lady's_] Rowe. _ladies_ Qq Ff.

[4229] _do find_] _so find_ Quoted thus by Grey.

[4230] _So, fare you well_] Ff. _so farewell_ Qq, reading _I ...
farewell_ as one line. Omitted by Hanmer.

[4231] _him_] om. F₁.

_should_] Ff Q₃. _would_ Q₁ Q₂.

[4232] _party_] Ff. _lady_ Qq.

[Exeunt.] Ff. Exit. Qq. Exeunt severally. Capell.

[4233] SCENE VI.] Pope. Scena Quinta. Ff.

Fields ...] Capell. The Country. Rowe. The Country, near Dover.
Theobald.

Enter] ... Enter Glo'ster, and Edgar as a Peasant. Theobald. Enter
Gloucester, and Edgar. Ff. Enter Gloster and Edmund. Qq.

[4234] _we_] Qq. _I_ Ff.

[4235] _up it_] Ff. _it up_ Qq.

[4236] _Horrible_] _Horribly_ Collier MS.

[4237] _Horrible ... sea?_] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

[4238] _Hark, do you_] _Hark, hark; do you not_ Capell.

_No, truly._] _No truly, not_ Hanmer.

[4239] _alter'd_] Ff. _altered_ Qq.

_speak'st_] _speakest_ Q₂.

[4240] _In_] Ff. _With_ Qq.

[4241] _You're_] Rowe. _Y'are_ Q₁ Ff Q₃. _Y'ar_ Q₂.

[4242] _Methinks_] _Sure_ Pope.

_you're_] Rowe. _y'are_ Q₁ Ff Q₃. _y'ar_ Q₂. _you are_ Capell.

[4243] _Come ... fearful_] As in Qq. Two lines, the first ending _sir,_
in Ff.

[4244] _dizzy_] F₃ F₄. _dizy_ Q₁ F₂ Q₃. _dizi_ Q₂. _dizie_ F₁.

[4245] _that_] _who_ So quoted by Wordsworth (Preface: Ed. 1815).

_samphire_] _samphier_ Q₃. _sampire_ Q₁ Q₂ Ff.

[4246] _walk_] _walke_ Qq. _walkd_ Ff.

_beach_] Q₂ Ff. _beake_ Q₁ Q₃.

[4247] _yond_] Ff Q₃. _yon_ Q₁ Q₂.

[4248] _a buoy_] Ff. _a boui_ Q₂. _aboue_ Q₁. _above_ Q₃.

[4249] _pebbles chafes_] Pope. _peebles chafe_ Q₁ Q₃. _peeble chaffes_
Q₂. _pebble chafes_ Ff.

[4250] _heard ... I'll_] F₄. _heard ... Ile_ F₁ F₂. _heard ... I'le_
F₃. _heard: it is so hie Ile_ Q₁. _heard, its so hie ile_ Q₂. _heard it
is so: hie Ile_ Q₃.

[4251] _Give ... upright._] As in Qq. Three lines, ending _hand: ...
verge: ... upright,_, in Ff.

[4252] _you are_] _you're_ Pope.

[4253] _beneath_] _below_ Pope.

[4254] _upright_] _outright_ Hanmer (Warburton).

[4255] _fairies_]_fairiegs_ Q₃.

[4256] _farther_] Qq. _further_ Ff.

[4257] _you_] Qq. _ye_ Ff.

[Seems to go. Rowe.

[4258] _Why I do ... despair Is_] Q₂ F₁ F₂, substantially. _Why I
do ... dispaire, tis_ Q₁ Q₃. _Why do I ... despair, 'Tis_ F₃ F₄. _Why
do I ... despair? 'Tis_ Rowe.

_Why ... it._] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

[4259] [Kneeling] He kneels. Qq. om. Ff.

[4260] _snuff_] _snurff_ Q₂.

[4261] _him_] Ff. om. Qq.

[4262] [He ...] He falles. Qq. Omitted in Ff. He leaps and falls along.
Rowe. Gloster leaps, and falls along. Knight (Jackson conj.), after
_farewell._

[4263] _Gone ... sir?_] As in Ff. Prose in Qq.

[4264] _Gone, sir:_] _Gon sir,_ Qq. _Gone sir,_ F₁. _Good sir,_ F₂ F₃
F₄. _Gone, sir?_ Jennens. _Gone, sir._ Knight. _Go on, sir;_ Jackson
conj. _Going, sir,_ Grant White conj.

[4265] _And yet ... past._] Marked as 'Aside' by Capell.

[4266] _may_] _my_ Q₂.

[4267] _treasury_] _treasure_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[4268] _had thought_] _thought had_ Q₁ Q₃.

[4269] _Ho, ... speak!_] _Hoa, you, hear you, friend! Sir! Sir! speak!_
Theobald. _Ho, you sir, you sir, friend! Hear you, sir? Speak:_ Capell.

_friend_] om. Qq.

_Hear_] _heare_ Qq F₁. _here_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

_speak_] _speak, speak_ Keightley.

[4270] _Thus ... revives._] Marked as 'Aside' by Capell.

[4271] _Hadst ... air,_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_gossamer_] _goss'mer_ Pope. _gosmore_ Qq. _gozemore_ Ff. _gossemeer_
Capell.

_feathers,_] _feathers and_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[4272] _Thou'dst_] F₁. _Thoud'st_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _Thou hadst_ Qq.

[4273] _not;_] _not?_ Jennens.

_speak'st_] F₁ F₂. _speakst_ Q₁ Q₃. _speakest_ Q₂. _speak_ F₃ F₄.

_sound._] _sound?_ F₄.

[4274] _at each_] Qq Ff. _at least_ Rowe. _attacht_ Pope. _on end_
Johnson conj. _a-stretch_ Jennens conj. _at reach_ Steevens conj. _at
end_ Jackson conj. _at eche_ Singer (ed. 2). _at eke_ Grant White conj.
_at length_ Jervis conj. _at lash_ Anon. conj.

[4275] _fell_] _fallen_ Rowe.

[4276] _no?_] _no I_ Q₂.

[4277] _summit_] Rowe (ed. 2). _summet_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _somnet_ F₁.
_summons_ Q₁ Q₃. _sommons_ Q₂.

_bourn._] _bourn!_ Pope. _bourn_ F₃ F₄. _bourne_ F₁ F₂. _borne_, Qq.

[4278] _a-height_] Hyphened by Warburton.

_shrill-gorged_] _shrill-gorg'd_ F₁. _shrill gorg'd_ Qq. _shrill-gor'd_
F₂ F₃. _shrill gor'd_ F₄.

[4279] _up._] _up?_ Q₂.

[4280] _death? 'Twas_] _death twas_ Q₂.

[4281] _arm:_] _arme?_ Q₂.

[4282] _How is't? Feel_] _how feele_ Qq.

[4283] _o' the_] _o' th'_ F₁. _oth'_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _of the_ Qq.

_cliff, what_] _cliffe, what_ Q₁ Q₃. _cliffe what_ Q₂. _cliffe. What_
Ff.

[4284] _unfortunate_] _unfortune_ F₂.

_beggar_] _bagger_ Q₂.

[4285] _methought_] Q₁. _me thought_ Ff Q₃. _me thoughts_ Q₂.

[4286] _he had_] Ff. _a had_ Qq.

[4287] _whelk'd_] Hanmer. _welkt_ Q₁ Q₃. _welk't_ Q₂. _wealk'd_ F₁ F₂.
_walk'd_ F₃ F₄.

_enridged_] Qq. _enraged_ Ff.

[4288] _clearest_] F₃ F₄. _cleerest_ Qq F₁ F₂. _clarest_ Pope.

_make them_] Ff. _made their_ Qq.

[4289] _die_] _dye_ (in italics) Capell.

_die. That_] _die that_ Q₂.

[4290] _'twould_] Ff. _would he_ Q₁ Q₃. _would it_ Q₂.

[4291] _'The fiend, the fiend:' he_] _The fiend, the fiend--he_ Rowe.
_The fiend, the fiend, he_ Q₁ Ff. _The fiend the fiend, he_ Q₂. _The
fiend, the fiend he_ Q₃.

[4292] _Bear ... here?_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_Bear free_] F₃ F₄. _Beare free_ F₁ F₂. _Bare, free_ Q₁ Q₃. _Bare free_
Q₂.

Enter Lear ...] Capell. Enter Lear mad. Qq (after _thus_, line 82).
Enter Lear. Ff (after _thoughts_). Enter Lear, drest madly with
Flowers. Theobald (after _thoughts_).

[4293] SCENE VII. Pope.

[4294] _The ... thus._] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

[4295] _safer_] _sober_ Warburton. _saner_ Johnson conj.

_will_] _would_ Hanmer.

[4296] _coining_] _coyning_ Qq. _crying_ Ff.

[4297] _side-piercing_] Hyphened in Ff.

[4298] _Nature's_] F₁. _Nature is_ Qq. _Natures_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[4299] _crow-keeper_] _cow-keeper_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[4300] _piece of_] om. Qq.

_do't_] _doo't_ Ff. _do it_ Qq.

[4301] _well flown, bird_] _well-flown bird_ Eccles conj.

[4302] _bird! i' the clout, i' the clout:_] _bird: i' th' clout, i'
th' clout:_ Ff (_ith'_ F₂ F₃ F₄). _birde in the ayre,_ Qq (_bird_ Q₂).
_barb! i' th' clout, i' th' clout:_ Theobald (Warburton).

[4303] _hewgh_] Ff. _hagh_ Qq.

[4304] _with ... They_ _with a white beard? They_ Ff. _ha Regan, they_
Qq.

[4305] _white_] Qq. _the white_ Ff. _three white_ Anon. conj.

[4306] _every thing that_] Ff. _every thing_ Q₂. _all_ Q₁ Q₃.

_said!... too was_] _saide: I and no too was_ Q₁ Q₃. _saide, I and no
toe, was_ Q₂. _said: I, and no too, was_ Ff. _said ay and no to, was_
Grant White (Anon. apud Pye conj.)

[4307] _the wind_] _wind_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[4308] _'em ... 'em_] _them ... them_ Qq.

[4309] _men_] _women_ Upton conj.

_o' their_] F₁ F₃ F₄. _otheir_ F₂. _of their_ Qq.

[4310] _ague-proof_] F₄. _agu-proofe_ F₁ F₂. _agu-proof_ F₃.
_argue-proofe_ Qq.

[4311] _The ... king?_] Prose in Qq F₄.

[4312] _Ay ... cause?_] Verse in Ff. Prose in Qq.

[4313] _every_] _ever_ Q₂.

[4314] _quakes_] _quake_ S. Walker conj.

[4315] _I pardon ... Adultery?_] _What was the cause? Adultery. I
pardon that man's life._ Eccles conj.

[4316] _thy_] _the_ Pope.

[4317] _Adultery?_] om. Seymour conj.

[4318] _Adultery?... soldiers._] Arranged as in Johnson. Six lines,
ending _for adultery?... fly ... thrive: ... father, ... sheets ...
souldiers,_ in Ff. Prose in Qq. Capell ends the lines _Adultery.-- ...
No: ... fly ... thrive: ... father, ... sheets ... soldiers._

[4319] _die: die for_] F₃ F₄. _dye: dye for_ F₁ F₂. _dye for_ Q₁. _die
for_ Q₂ Q₃.

[4320] _Does_] _do's_ Ff. _do_ Q₁ Q₃. _doe_ Q₂.

[4321] _than_] _Than were_ Capell.

[4322] _sheets._] _sheets, were unto me._ Keightley.

[4323] _Behold ... inherit,_] Arranged as by Johnson. Prose in Qq Ff.

[4324] _yond_] F₁ F₂. _yon_ Qq F₃. _you_ F₄.

[4325] _presages_] Ff. _presageth_ Qq.

[4326] _minces_] _mimics_ Collier (Collier MS.)

_does_] _do's_ F₁ F₃ F₄. _dos_ F₂. _do_ Qq.

[4327] _To hear_] _heare_ Qq. _hearing_ Anon. MS. See note (V).

[4328] _name; The_] _name. The_ Ff. _name to_ Qq.

[4329] _soiled_] _soyled_ Qq Ff. _stalled_ Warburton. _spoiled_ Daniel
conj. _soil'd_ Keightley, reading _To hear ... appetite_ as two lines,
the first ending _nor_.

[4330] _waist_] _waste_ Q₁ Ff Q₃. _wast_ Q₂.

_they are_] _tha're_ Q₂. _they're_ Johnson.

[4331] _Beneath ... pit,_] Arranged as in Globe ed. Prose in Qq Ff.
Johnson reads _Beneath ... darkness_ as one line.

[4332] _is all_] _it is all_ Warburton.

_fiends'_] Capell. _fiends_ Qq Ff. _fiend's_ Johnson.

[4333] _there's the sulphurous_] Edd. (Globe ed.) _theres the sulphury_
Qq (_ther's_ Q₂). _there is the sulphurous_ Ff.

[4334] _Burning_] _there's burning_ Keightley, ending the lines
_stench, ... me ... apothecary ... there's ... thee._

_consumption_] Ff. _consummation_ Q₁ Q₃. _consumation_ Q₂.

[4335] _Give ... thee._] Prose in Qq Ff. Two lines, the first ending
_apothecary_, in Johnson.

_civet, good apothecary, to sweeten_] Punctuated as in Qq. _Civet; good
Apothecary sweeten_ Ff.

[4336] _Let me ... mortality_] Two lines in Ff. _Here ... mortality._
Qq (as one line).

[4337] _O ... me?_] As in Rowe. Three lines in Ff. Prose in Qq.

[4338] _Shall_] Ff. _shold_ Q₁. _should_ Q₂ Q₃.

_nought_] _naught_ Qq Ff.

_Dost thou_] _Do'st thou_ Ff. _do you_ Qq.

[4339] _thine_] Ff. _thy_ Qq.

[4340] _squiny_] _squint_ Q₃.

_at me_] Ff. _on me_ Qq.

[4341] _this_] Ff. _That_ Qq.

_but_] Ff. om. Qq.

_on't_] Q₁ Q₃. _oft_ Q₂. _of it_ Ff.

[4342] _the letters_] Qq. _thy letters_ Ff.

_one_] om. F₁ F₂.

[4343] _I would ... at it_] As in Theobald. Prose in Qq. Two lines, the
first ending _report_, in Ff. Marked as 'Aside' by Hanmer.

[4344] _the case_] _this case_ Rowe.

[4345] _nor no_] _nor_ Q₁ Q₃.

[4346] _a heavy_] _heavy_ F₃ F₄.

[4347] _light_] _light one_ Keightley.

[4348] _goes._] Q₂ Ff. _goes?_ Q₁ Q₃.

[4349] _this_] Ff. _the_ Qq.

[4350] _thine_] Ff. _thy_ Qq.

[4351] _yond ... yond_] Ff. _yon ... yon_ Qq.

[4352] _thine_] Ff. _thy_ Qq.

[4353] _change places, and_] Omitted in Qq.

[4354] _justice ... thief_] _theefe ... Iustice_ Qq.

[4355] _Ay,_] _I_ Qq F₁ F₂. om. F₃ F₄.

[4356] _dog's obeyed_] _dogge, so bad_ Q₁ Q₃. _dogge, so bade_ Q₂.

[4357] _Thou ... cozener._] Arranged as in Pope. Prose in Qq Ff.

[4358] _thine_] Qq. _thy_ Ff.

[4359] _Thou hotly lust'st_] Rowe. _thou hotly lusts_ Ff. _thy blood
hotly lusts_ Qq (_bloud_ Q₂).

[4360] _cozener_] _cosioner_ Q₂.

[4361] _Through ... not._] Arranged as in Rowe. Prose in Qq Ff.

[4362] _Through_] Qq. _Thorough_ Ff.

_tatter'd_] F₁ F₂. _tattered_ Q₁ Q₃. _tottered_ Q₂. _and tatter'd_ F₃
F₄.

_clothes_] _ragges_ Q₁ Q₃. _raggs_ Q₂.

_small_] Q₁ Q₃. _smal_ Q₂. _great_ Ff.

[4363] _hide_] Ff. _hides_ Qq.

_Plate sin_] Theobald (ed. 2). _Plate sins_ Pope. _Place sinnes_ F₁ F₂.
_Place sinns_ F₃. _Place sins_ F₄.

[4364] _Plate ... lips._] Omitted in Qq.

[4365] _in rags_] _with rags_ Jennens.

_a_] _and_ Rowe.

_does_] F₂. _do's_ F₁. _doth_ F₃ F₄.

[4366] _offend, none_,] _offend_, Hanmer.

_able_] _absolve_ Hanmer.

_'em_] _them_ Capell MS.

[4367] _Now, now, now, now_] Ff. _No, now_ Q₁ Q₃. _no now_ Q₂.

_harder, harder_] _pull harder, harder_ Keightley.

[4368] _Now ... so._] One line of verse in Pope (ed. 2). Capell reads
_Pull ... so_ as one line.

[4369] _O ... madness!_] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

[4370] _impertinency mix'd!_] _Impertinency mixt,_ Ff. _impertinency,
mixt_ Q₁. _impertinencie mixt_ Q₂.

[4371] _If ... her to._ Verse in Ff. Prose in Qq.

[4372] _fortunes_] Ff. _fortune_ Qq.

[4373] _know'st_] _knowest_ Q₂.

[4374] _wawl_] _wawle_ Ff. _waile_ Q₁ Q₃. _wayl_ Q₂.

_mark._] _marke me._ Qq. _mark--_Rowe.

[4375] _This's a good block._] Edd. _This a good blocke._ Qq. _This
a good blocke:_ F₁ F₂. _This a good block:_ F₃ F₄. _This a good
block!--_ Rowe. _This a good flock!--_ Johnson conj. _This a good
block?_ Steevens (1778). _Tis a good block._ Ritson conj. _This' a good
block:--_ Dyce (S. Walker conj.) _'Tis a good plot._ Collier (Collier
MS.)

[4376] _shoe_] _shoo_ F₁. _shooe_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _shoot_ Qq. _suit_ Anon.
conj.

[4377] _felt_] Ff. _fell_ Qq.

_I'll ... proof;_] Omitted in Qq.

_put't_] _put it_ Capell.

[4378] _I have_] _I've_ Pope.

_stol'n_] _stole_ Qq.

_sons-in-law_] _sonnes in law_ Q₁ Q₃. _sonne in lawes_ Q₂. _son in
lawes_ F₁. _sonnes in lawes_ F₂. _sons in laws_ F₃. _sons-in-laws_ F₄.

[4379] Enter ... Attendants.] Rowe. Enter three Gentlemen. Qq. Enter
a Gentleman. Ff. Enter Gentleman, Attendants of Cordelia; and Guard.
Capell.

[4380] SCENE VIII. Pope.

_hand_] Ff. _hands_ Qq.

_him. Sir,_] _him; sir,_ Rowe. _him sirs._ Q₁ Q₃. _him sirs,_ Q₂. _him,
sir._ Ff.

[4381] _Your ... daughter--_] Ff. Omitted in Q₁ Q₃. _your most deere_
Q₂ (at the end of line 187).

[4382] _even_] Ff. _eene_ Qq.

[4383] _ransom_] _a ransom_ Q₁ Q₃.

_a surgeon_] Capell. _a chirurgeon_ Q₁ Q₃. _a churgion_ Q₂. _surgeons_
Ff.

[4384] _to the_] Q₂. _to 'th_ Q₁ Q₃. _to'th'_ F₁. _toth'_ F₂. _to th'_
F₃ F₄.

[4385] _a man a man_] Ff. _a man_ Qq.

[4386] _garden_] _garding_ Q₃.

[4387] _Ay, ... that._] See note (XVIII).

[4388] _die_] _bid_ Becket conj.

[4389] _Then ... sa._] Prose in Qq and Capell. Two lines, the first
ending _get it_, in Ff.

[4390] _Nay, if_] _nay if_ Q₁ Q₃. _nay and_ Q₂. _Come, and_ Ff. _Come,
an_ Pope. _Nay, an_ Capell. _Nay, come, an_ Jennens.

[4391] _by_] Ff. _with_ Qq.

_Sa, sa, sa, sa._] Omitted in Qq.

[Exit ...] Exit, running; Attendants and Guard follow. Capell. Exit
King running. Qq. Exit. Ff.

[4392] _one_] Qq. _a_ Ff.

[4393] _have_] Ff. _hath_ Qq. _had_ Anon. conj.

[4394] _sir,_] Ff. om. Qq.

[4395] _Most ... sound._] Divided as in Q₂. The first line ends at
_heares_ in Q₁ Q₃; at _vulgar_ in Ff.

[4396] _one_] _ones_ Q₁ Q₃.

_hears that_] F₃ F₄. _heares that_ F₁ F₂. _heares_ Q₁ Q₃. _here's that_
Q₂.

[4397] _Which ... sound_] _That ... sense_ Q₁. _That ... sence_ Q₂ Q₃.

[4398] _But ... army?_] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

[4399] _near's_] F₃ F₄. _neeres_ Q₁ F₂ Q₃. _neer's_ Q₂. _neere's_ F₁.

[4400] _speedy foot_] Ff. _speed for't_ Q₁ Q₃. _speed fort_ Q₂.

_descry_] Ff. _descries_ Q₁. _descryes_ Q₂. _discries_ Q₃.

[4401] _Stands_] _Standst_ Q₂.

_thought_] Ff. _thoughts_ Qq.

_that's all_] om. Q₁.

[4402] _Her_] Ff. _His_ Q₁ Q₃. _Hir_ Q₂.

Edg. _I ... sir._] Omitted by Pope.

[Exit Gent.] Johnson. Exit. Qq. Exit. Ff (after _on_).

[4403] _ever-gentle_] Hyphened by Capell.

[4404] _Well pray_] _Well, pray_ Q₂ F₄.

[4405] _tame to_] Ff. _lame by_ Qq.

[4406] _known_] _knowing_ Hanmer.

[4407] _Hearty ... boot!_] As in Ff. Prose in Qq.

[4408] _bounty_] _bornet_ Q₂ (Cap. Dev. Mus. per. and Bodl. 1, 2).

_the benison_] _beniz_ Q₂ (Cap. Dev. Mus. per. and Bodl. 1, 2).

[4409] _To ... boot_] Ff. _to boot, to boot_ Q₁ Q₂ (Mus. imp.) Q₃. _to
saue thee_ Q₂ (Cap. Dev. Mus. per. and Bodl. 1, 2). _to boot_ Pope,
reading _The bounty ... to boot_ as one line. _To boot_ Hanmer, reading
as a seperate line.

Enter Oswald.] Collier. Enter Steward. Qq Ff.

SCENE IX. Pope.

[4410] _A ... arm._] As in Ff. Prose in Qq.

[4411] _Most_] _this is most_ Hanmer.

_happy!_] _happy;_ Q₁ Q₃. _happy,_ Q₂. _happie_ F₁. _happy:_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[4412] _first_] Omitted in Q₂ (Cap. Dev. Mus. per. and Bodl. 1, 2).

[4413] _Thou_] om. Pope.

_old_] Ff. _most_ Qq.

[4414] _Now_] om. Pope.

[4415] _to 't_] Qq F₃ F₄. _too 't_ F₁ F₂. _to it_ Johnson.

[Edgar interposes.] Collier. Edgar opposes. Johnson. om. Qq Ff.

[4416] _Darest_] _darst_ Q₁ Q₃. _durst_ Q₂. _Dar'st_ F₁. _Darst_ F₂ F₃
F₄.

[4417] _that_] om. Qq.

[4418] _Chill ... 'casion._] Two lines in Ff. Capell ends line 234
_Ch'ill not._

_zir_] Ff. _sir_ Qq.

_vurther_] om. Qq. _further_ Jennens.

_'casion_] _cagion_ Qq.

[4419] _and_] om. Qq.]

_volk_ F₃ F₄. _volke_ Q₁ F₁ F₂ Q₃. _voke_ Q₂.

[4420] _An_] Capell. _and_ Qq Ff.

_ha'_] Ff. _have_ Qq.

_zwaggered_] _zwaggar'd_ Q₁ Q₃. _swaggar'd_ Q₂. _zwaggerd_ F₁.
_zwagged_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

_'twould_] _it wold_ Q₁. _it would_ Q₂ Q₃.

[4421] _zo_] _so_ Q₂.

_as 'tis_] om. Qq.

_vortnight_] _fortnight_ Q₂ (Cap. Dev. Mus. per. and Bodl. 1, 2).

[4422] _th'_] Ff. _the_ Qq.

_che vor ye_] _che vor 'ye_ Ff. _chevore ye_ Qq.

_I'se_] _ice_ Ff. _ile_ Qq. _iz_ Capell.

_whether_] Qq. _whither_ Ff.

[4423] _costard_] Q₁ Ff Q₃. _coster_ Q₂ (Cap. Dev. Mus. per. and Bodl.
1, 2). _costerd_ Q₂ (Mus. imp.)

_ballow_] Ff. _bat_ Q₁ Q₂ (Mus. imp.) Q₃. _battero_ Q₂ (Cap. Dev. Mus.
per. and Bodl. 1, 2).

_chill_] _ile_ Q₂.

[4424] [They fight.] Qq. om. Ff.

[4425] _zir_] _sir_ Q₂.

_vor_] Ff. _for_ Qq.

[4426] [Oswald falls.] Edd. Edgar knocks him down. Rowe. om. Qq Ff.

[4427] _letters_] _letter_ Rann (Smith conj.)

[4428] _To ... out Upon_] Divided as in Ff. One line in Qq.

[4429] _Upon the British_] Qq. _Upon the English_ Ff. _On th' English_
Hanmer.

[4430] _Upon ... death!_] Capell arranges as two half-lines.

_death! Death!_] Edd. _death! death._ Qq. _death, death._ Ff.
_death,--_ Pope.

[4431] [Dies.] He dyes. Q₁. He dies. Q₂ Q₃. om. Ff.

[4432] _As duteous ... desire._] One line in Q₂.

[4433] _Sit ... not:_] As in Ff. Four lines, ending _pockets, ...
friends, deathsman ... not,_ in Qq.

[4434] _you. Lets_] Ff. _you, lets_ Q₁ Q₂ (Mus. imp.) Q₃. _you lets_
Q₂ (Cap. Dev. Mus. per. and Bodl. 1, 2).

[4435] [seating him at a Distance. Capell.

[4436] _these_] Ff. _his_ Qq.

_the letters_] Ff. _These letters_ Qq. _this letter_ Rann (Smith conj.)

[4437] _of May_] Ff. _of may_ Q₁ Q₂ (Cap. Dev. Mus. per. and Bodl. 1,
2) Q₃. _of, May_ Q₂ (Mus imp.)

[4438] _I am_] _I'm_ Pope.

_sorry_] _sorrow_ Q₂.

[4439] _Leave_] _By your leave_ Rowe.

_manners, blame_] _manners blame_ Qq. _manners: blame_ Ff.
_manners--blame_ Rowe.

[4440] _not: To_] Pope. _not, To_ Q₁ Q₃. _not To_ Q₂ Ff.

[4441] _we'ld_] _wee'd_ Qq. _we_ Ff.

[4442] _is_] Qq F₁. _are_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[4443] [Reads] Reads the Letter. Ff. A Letter. Q₁ Q₂ (Mus. imp.) Q₃.
om. Q₂ (Cap. Dev. Mus. per. and Bodl. 1, 2).

[4444] _Let ... labour._] Prose in Q₂ Ff. Seven lines in italics in Q₁
Q₃.

[4445] _our_] Ff. _your_ Qq.

[4446] _done, if_] _done, If_ Q₂. _done: If_ Q₁. _done. If_ Ff. _done;
If_ Q₃.

_conqueror: then_] _conqueror. Then_ Pope, _conqueror, then_ Qq Ff.

[4447] _gaol_] F₄. _gaole_ F₁. _goale_ F₂. _goal_ F₃. _Iayle_ Q₁ Q₃.
_gayle_ Q₂.

[4448] _for your_] _of our_ F₃ F₄.

[4449] _--wife ... say--_] Put in parentheses in Ff. _wife (so ... say)
& your_ Q₁ Q₃. _wife (so ... say) your_ Q₂.

_servant,_] _servant and for you her owne for Venter,_ Q₂. _servant and
for you her owne for Ventering_ Anon. MS. See note (V). _servant, and
for you her own foventer_ Becket conj. _servant, and your own for ever_
Mitford conj. (from Q₁).

[4450] _O_] Qq. _Oh_ F₁. _Of_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

_undistinguish'd_] _undistinguisht_ Q₁ Q₃. _Indistinguisht_ Q₂.
_indinguish'd_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _indistinguish'd_ F₄. _unextinguish'd_ Collier
(Collier MS.) _undistinguishable_ Staunton conj.

_undistinguish'd ... will_] _undisguised scope of woman's will or
undisguised scape of woman's wit_ Singer conj.

_space_] _scope_ Theobald conj. _blaze_ Collier (Collier MS.) _sense_
Staunton conj. _maze_ Bailey conj.

_will_ Ff. _wit_ Qq.

[4451] _in the_] _i' th'_ Pope.

[4452] _post_] _most_ Anon. conj. MS.

[4453] _the mature_] _mature_ Pope.

[4454] _death-practised_] Hyphened in Ff.

[4455] _thy_] Ff. _his_ Q₁ Q₃.

[4456] _The king ... sense,_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_vile_] F₄. _vilde_ Q₁ F₁ F₂ Q₃ F₃. _vild_ Q₂.

[4457] _sever'd_] Ff. _fenced_ Qq.

[4458] _imaginations_] _imagination_ Johnson.

[4459] [Drum afar off.] A Drumme afarre off. Q₁ Q₃. A drum a farre off.
Q₂. Drum afarre off. Ff (after line 282).

[4460] _Give ... drum:_] One line in Q₂.

[4461] _Come, father_] _Come further_ Johnson.

[Exeunt.] Ff. Exit. Qq.

[4462] SCENE VII.] SCENE VI. Rowe. SCENE X. Pope.

A tent ... camp.] Steevens, after Capell. A Chamber. Rowe.

Lear ... asleep,] Steevens, after Capell.

soft music playing,] Dyce.

Gentleman ...] Edd. (Globe ed.) Physician, Gentleman, ... Capell.

Enter ... and Doctor.] Qq. Enter ... and Gentleman. Ff. Enter Cordelia
and Kent. Capell.

[4463] _O ... me._] Arranged as in Rowe. Three lines, ending _Kent, ...
goodnesse, ... me,_ in Q₁ Q₃. Two lines, the first ending _goodnes,_ in
Q₂. Five lines, ending _Kent, ... worke ... goodnesse?... short, ...
me,_ in Ff.

[4464] _My life_] _Life_ Pope.

[4465] _is_] _'tis_ Eccles conj.

[4466] _Be ... off._] Arranged as in Q₁ Ff Q₃. Two lines, the first
ending _those,_ in Q₂.

[4467] _me_] Qq. om. Ff.

[4468] _made_] _laid_ Warburton. _main_ Collier (Collier MS.)

[4469] _Then ... king?_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff. Pope ends line 11
at _so_.

_be't_] Ff. _beet_ Q₂. _be it_ Q₁ Q₃.

_so, my good lord. How_] _so my good lord: How_ Ff. _so: my lord how_
Q₁ Q₃. _so, my good lord how_ Q₂. _so. My lord, how_ Pope (ed. 1). _so
My lord--how_ Pope, ed. 2 (Theobald).

[To the Doctor] To the Physician. Theobald. om. Qq Ff.

[Going towards the Bed. Capell.

[4470] Doct.] Qq. Gent. Ff.

[4471] _sleeps_] _he sleeps_ Keightley.

[4472] _O you kind_] _Kind_ Capell.

[4473] _O ... nature_] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

[4474] _and jarring_] Ff. _and hurrying_ Q₁ Q₂. _hurrying_ Q₃.

[4475] _child-changed_] Hyphen omitted in Q₂.

_So please_] _Please_ Pope.

[4476] _So ... king:_] Divided as in Ff. One line in Qq.

[4477] _That_] om. Q₁ Q₃.

_king: he ... long._] _king, He ... long._ Q₂. _king He ... long._ Q₁
Q₃. _king, he ... long?_ Ff. _king? he ... long._ Hanmer.

[4478] _array'd?_] _arayd,_ Q₂.]

[Soft music. Grant White.

[Enter Lear in a chaire carried by Servants. Ff. om. Qq.

[4479] Gent.] Ff. Doct. Qq.

_his_] Qq. om. Ff.

[4480] Doct.] Edd. (Globe ed.) Phy. Capell. Continued to Phy. by Pope.
Kent. Q₁ Q₃. Gent. Q₂. Continued to Gent. in Ff.

_Be by, good madam_] _Good madam be by_ Qq.

[4481] _not_] Omitted in F₁ F₂.

[4482] Cor. _Very well._ Doct. _Please ... there!_] Qq. Omitted in Ff.

[4483] _O ... made!_] Arranged as in Ff. Four lines, ending
_father, ... lippes, ... harmes ... made,_ in Q₁ Q₃. Three lines,
ending _lips, ... sisters ... made,_ in Q₂.

[4484] _father! Restoration_] Pope. _father, Restoration_ Q₁
Q₃. _father restoratiō_ Q₂. _father, restauratian_ F₁. _father,
restauration_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

_Restoration hang_] _Restauration, hang_ Theobald.

[4485] _Thy_] _Her_ Hanmer.

[4486] _dear_] _dearest_ Theobald.

[4487] _you_] _he_ Anon. MS. See note (V).

[4488] _Had challenged_] _Did challenge_ Ff.

_a face_] _face_ F₃ F₄.

[4489] _opposed_] _oppos'd_ Ff. _exposd_ Qq.

_warring_] Qq. _iarring_ F₁. _jarring_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[4490] _To stand ... helm?_] Omitted in Ff.

[4491] _dread-bolted_] Hyphened by Theobald.

[4492] _lightning? to_] Pointed as in Theobald. _lightning, to_ Q₁ Q₃.
_lightning to_ Q₂.

_watch--poor perdu!--_] _watch, poor perdu!_ Warburton. _watch poore
Per du,_ Qq. _watch poor perdue:_ Theobald. _watch pour perdu_ Pye conj.

[4493] _helm? Mine_] Pointed as in Q₁ Q₃. _helme mine_ Q₂.

[4494] _Mine ... father,_] Arranged as in Qq. Three lines, ending
_me, ... fire, ... father)_ in Ff. Three, ending _shou'd ... fire: ...
father,_ in Pope.

[4495] _Mine enemy's_] _Mine Enemies_ Ff. _Mine iniurious_ Q₁ Q₂. _Mine
injurious_ Q₃. _My very enemy's_ Theobald. _Mine injurer's_ Capell.

_dog_] _dog, even_ Keightley. _furious dog_ Mitford conj.

[4496] _Alack, alack_] _Alack_ Hanmer, ending lines 36-42, _Mine ...
him,_ at _shou'd ... wast ... swine ... straw?... wits, ... wakes, ...
him._

[4497] _thy_] _my_ F₃ F₄.

[4498] _concluded all. He_] Q₁ Ff Q₃. _concluded all, he_ Q₂.
_concluded.--Ah! he_ Warburton.

[4499] Doct.] Qq. Gen. F₁. Gent. F₂ F₃ F₄.

_do you;_] _do you speak,_ Hanmer.

[4500] _How does ... majesty?_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[4501] _o' the_] _o' th'_ F₁. _oth'_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _a'th_ Q₁ Q₃. _ath_ Q₂.

[4502] _scald_] _scal'd_ F₁.

_do you know me?_] Ff. _know ye me?_ Q₁ Q₃. _know me._ Q₂. _know you
me?_ Anon. MS. See note (V).

[4503] _You are_] Ff. _Y'are_ Q₁ Q₃. _Yar_ Q₂.

_when_] Q₁ Q₃ F₃ F₄. _where_ Q₂ F₁ F₂.

[4504] _He's ... daylight?_] Two lines in Qq. Four in Ff.

[4505] _I am_] _I'm_ Pope.

_mightily_] _much_ Hanmer.

_e'en_] _ene_ Qq. _ev'n_ F₁ F₂. _even_ F₃ F₄.

[4506] _what to say_] _what_ Hanmer.

[4507] _I feel ... condition_] Arranged as in Ff. One line in Qq.

[4508] _O ... kneel._] Arranged as in Q₁ Ff Q₃. Prose in Q₂.

[4509] _upon_] _on_ Hanmer.

[4510] _hands_] Qq. _hand_ Ff.

[4511] _No, sir,_] Omitted in Ff.

_me_] Omitted in Q₂.

[4512] _Fourscore ... less;_] One line in Knight. Two, the first ending
_upward,_ in Ff. Capell ends the lines _upward ... plainly,_ reading
with Ff.

_Fourscore_] _Fourscore years_ Keightley, reading the rest as Qq.

_not ... less;_] Omitted in Qq, which read _Fourscore ... plainly_ as
one line.

[4513] _plainly_] _plainly with you_ Hanmer, reading the rest as Qq.

[4514] _in my perfect_] Q₂ Ff. _perfect in my_ Q₁ Q₃.

[4515] _for I am_] _for I'm_ Pope.

[4516] _nor I_] _nay I_ Pope.

[4517] _not_] Q₂ Ff. _no_ Q₁. _noe_ Q₃.

[4518] _I am, I am_] _I am_ Qq.

[4519] _Be ... not:_] One line in Qq. Two, the first ending _wet?_ in
Ff.

_pray_] _pray you_ Rowe.

[4520] _me_] _we_ F₂.

[4521] _not_] _none_ Hanmer.

[4522] _me._] _me?_ Q₂.

[4523] _Be ... settling._] Arranged as in Theobald. Prose in Qq. Three
lines, ending _rage ... go in, ... setling,_ in Ff.

[4524] _kill'd in him_] Ff. _cured in him_ Qq. _cur'd_ Hanmer. _quell'd
in him_ Collier conj.

[4525] _and yet ... lost._] Omitted in Ff.

[4526] _it is_] Qq. _'tis_ Steevens. _'twere_ Theobald.

[4527] _make him even o'er_] _wake him even, o'er_ Jackson conj.

_even_] _even go_ Keightley.

[4528] _trouble_] _And trouble_ Pope, arranging as Ff.

[4529] _Will't_] Rowe. _Wilt_ Qq Ff.

_your_] _you_ F₂.

[4530] _You ... foolish._] Prose, apparently, in Q₂. Three lines,
ending _me: ... forgive, ... foolish,_ in Q₁ Ff Q₃. Two lines, the
first ending _me:_ in Capell.

[4531] [Exeunt ... Gentleman.] Exeunt. Manet Kent and Gentleman. Q₁.
Exeunt. Manet Kent and Gent. Q₂. Exeunt. Manet Kent and Gentlemen. Q₃.
Exeunt. Ff.

[4532] Gent. _Holds ... fought._ [Exit.] Omitted in Ff.

[4533] _Holds ... Germany._] Prose in Qq. Verse, the lines ending
_sir, ... sir ... said, ... Edgar, ... Kent,_ in Capell.

[4534] _that_] om. Capell.

[4535] _As 'tis_] _'Tis_ Capell.

[4536] _in Germany ... sir._] Prose in Theobald. Four lines, ending
_changeable ... kingdom ... arbitrement ... sir,_ in Capell.

[4537] _Report ... sir._] Three lines, ending _about, ... apace ...
sir,_ in Qq.

[4538] _The_] _And the_ Capell.

_bloody_] _most bloody_ Capell. _a bloody_ Steevens (1793), reading
_The ... a bloody_ as one line.

[4539] [Exit.] Exit Gent. Theobald. om. Qq.

[4540] _battle's_] Theobald. _battels_ Qq.

[Exit.] Exit Kent. Theobald. om. Qq.




ACT V.


SCENE I. _The British camp near Dover._

    _Enter, with drum and colours_, EDMUND, REGAN, Gentlemen, _and_
                            Soldiers.[4541]

    _Edm._ Know of the duke if his last purpose hold,
    Or whether since he is advised by aught
    To change the course: he's full of alteration[4542]
    And self-reproving: bring his constant pleasure.

                                  [_To a Gentleman, who goes out._[4543]

    _Reg._ Our sister's man is certainly miscarried.                   5

    _Edm._ 'Tis to be doubted, madam.

    _Reg._                             Now, sweet lord,
    You know the goodness I intend upon you:
    Tell me, but truly, but then speak the truth,[4544]
    Do you not love my sister?

    _Edm._                     In honour'd love.[4545]

    _Reg._ But have you never found my brother's way[4546]            10
    To the forfended place?[4546]

    _Edm._                  That thought abuses you.[4546][4547]

    _Reg._ I am doubtful that you have been conjunct[4546][4547][4548]
    And bosom'd with her, as far as we call hers.[4546][4547][4548]

    _Edm._ No, by mine honour, madam.[4546][4549]

    _Reg._ I never shall endure her: dear my lord,[4550]              15
    Be not familiar with her.[4550]

    _Edm._                    Fear me not.--[4551][4552]
    She and the duke her husband![4551]

        _Enter, with drum and colours_, ALBANY, GONERIL, _and_
                            Soldiers.[4553]

    _Gon._ [_Aside_] I had rather lose the battle than that sister[4554][4555]
    Should loosen him and me.[4554][4556]

    _Alb._ Our very loving sister, well be-met.[4557]                 20
    Sir, this I hear; the king is come to his daughter,[4558]
    With others whom the rigour of our state
    Forced to cry out. Where I could not be honest,[4559]
    I never yet was valiant: for this business,[4559][4560]
    It toucheth us, as France invades our land,[4559]                 25
    Not bolds the king, with others, whom, I fear,[4559][4561]
    Most just and heavy causes make oppose.[4559]

    _Edm._ Sir, you speak nobly.[4559][4562]

    _Reg._                       Why is this reason'd?

    _Gon._ Combine together 'gainst the enemy;
    For these domestic and particular broils[4563]                    30
    Are not the question here.[4564]

    _Alb._                     Let's then determine[4565]
    With the ancient of war on our proceedings.[4565][4566]

    _Edm._ I shall attend you presently at your tent.[4567]

    _Reg._ Sister, you'll go with us?

    _Gon._ No.                                                        35

    _Reg._ 'Tis most convenient; pray you, go with us.[4568]

    _Gon._ [_Aside_] O, ho, I know the riddle.--I will go.

        _As they are going out, enter_ EDGAR _disguised_.[4569]

    _Edg._ If e'er your grace had speech with man so poor,[4570]
    Hear me one word.

    _Alb._            I'll overtake you. Speak.

                               [_Exeunt all but Albany and Edgar._[4571]

    _Edg._ Before you fight the battle, ope this letter.              40
    If you have victory, let the trumpet sound
    For him that brought it: wretched though I seem,[4572]
    I can produce a champion that will prove
    What is avouched there. If you miscarry,
    Your business of the world hath so an end,                        45
    And machination ceases. Fortune love you![4573]

    _Alb._ Stay till I have read the letter.[4574]

    _Edg._                                   I was forbid it.[4575]
    When time shall serve, let but the herald cry,[4575]
    And I'll appear again.[4575]

    Alb. Why, fare thee well: I will o'erlook thy paper.              50

                                                          [_Exit Edgar._

                        _Re-enter_ EDMUND.[4576]

    _Edm._ The enemy's in view: draw up your powers.[4577]
    Here is the guess of their true strength and forces[4578]
    By diligent discovery; but your haste[4579][4580]
    Is now urged on you.[4579]

    _Alb._               We will greet the time.          [_Exit._[4581]

    _Edm._ To both these sisters have I sworn my love;[4582]          55
    Each jealous of the other, as the stung[4583][4584]
    Are of the adder. Which of them shall I take?[4583]
    Both? one? or neither? Neither can be enjoy'd,[4583][4585]
    If both remain alive: to take the widow
    Exasperates, makes mad her sister Goneril;                        60
    And hardly shall I carry out my side,[4586]
    Her husband being alive. Now then we'll use
    His countenance for the battle; which being done,
    Let her who would be rid of him devise[4587]
    His speedy taking off. As for the mercy[4588]                     65
    Which he intends to Lear and to Cordelia,[4589]
    The battle done, and they within our power,
    Shall never see his pardon; for my state[4590]
    Stands on me to defend, not to debate.                      [_Exit._


SCENE II. _A field between the two camps._

_Alarum within. Enter, with drum and colours_, Lear, CORDELIA, _and_
Soldiers, _over the stage; and exeunt_.

                 _Enter_ EDGAR _and_ GLOUCESTER.[4591]

    _Edg._ Here, father, take the shadow of this tree[4592]
    For your good host; pray that the right may thrive:
    If ever I return to you again,[4593]
    I'll bring you comfort.[4593]

    _Glou._                 Grace go with you, sir!       [_Exit Edgar._

           _Alarum and retreat within. Re-enter_ EDGAR.[4594]

    _Edg._ Away, old man; give me thy hand; away!                      5
    King Lear hath lost, he and his daughter ta'en:
    Give me thy hand; come on.

    _Glou._ No farther, sir; a man may rot even here.[4595]

    _Edg._ What, in ill thoughts again? Men must endure[4596]
    Their going hence, even as their coming hither:                   10
    Ripeness is all: come on.

    _Glou._                   And that's true too.      [_Exeunt._[4597]


SCENE III. _The British camp near Dover._

    _Enter, in conquest, with drum and colours,_ EDMUND; LEAR _and_
        CORDELIA, _as prisoners_; Captain, Soldiers, _&c._[4598]

    _Edm._ Some officers take them away: good guard,
    Until their greater pleasures first be known[4599]
    That are to censure them.

    _Cor._                    We are not the first[4600][4601]
    Who with best meaning have incurr'd the worst.[4600]
    For thee, oppressed king, am I cast down;[4600][4602]              5
    Myself could else out-frown false fortune's frown.[4603]
    Shall we not see these daughters and these sisters?

    _Lear._ No, no, no, no! Come, let's away to prison:[4604]
    We two alone will sing like birds i' the cage:
    When thou dost ask me blessing, I'll kneel down                   10
    And ask of thee forgiveness: so we'll live,
    And pray, and sing, and tell old tales, and laugh[4605]
    At gilded butterflies, and hear poor rogues
    Talk of court news; and we'll talk with them too,[4606]
    Who loses and who wins, who's in, who's out;[4607]                15
    And take upon's the mystery of things,
    As if we were God's spies: and we'll wear out,
    In a wall'd prison, packs and sects of great ones[4608]
    That ebb and flow by the moon.

    _Edm._                         Take them away.

    _Lear_. Upon such sacrifices, my Cordelia,                        20
    The gods themselves throw incense.  Have I caught thee?[4609]
    He that parts us shall bring a brand from heaven,
    And fire us hence like foxes. Wipe thine eyes;[4610]
    The good-years shall devour them, flesh and fell,[4611][4612]
    Ere they shall make us weep: we'll see 'em starve first.[4612][4613]  25
    Come.              [_Exeunt Lear and Cordelia, guarded._[4613][4614]

    _Edm._ Come hither, captain; hark.[4615]
    Take thou this note: go follow them to prison:[4616]
    One step I have advanced thee; if thou dost[4617][4618]
    As this instructs thee, thou dost make thy way[4618]              30
    To noble fortunes: know thou this, that men[4618]
    Are as the time is: to be tender-minded[4618][4619]
    Does not become a sword: thy great employment[4618][4620]
    Will not bear question; either say thou'lt do 't,[4618][4621]
    Or thrive by other means.[4618]

    _Capt._                   I'll do 't, my lord.                    35

    _Edm._ About it; and write happy when thou hast done.[4622]
    Mark; I say, instantly, and carry it so[4623]
    As I have set it down.

    _Capt._ I cannot draw a cart, nor eat dried oats;[4624]
    If it be man's work, I'll do't.                   [_Exit._[4624]  40

   _Flourish. Enter_ ALBANY, GONERIL, REGAN, _another_ Captain, _and_
                            Soldiers.[4625]

    _Alb._ Sir, you have shown to-day your valiant strain,[4626]
    And fortune led you well: you have the captives[4627]
    That were the opposites of this day's strife:[4628]
    We do require them of you, so to use them[4629]
    As we shall find their merits and our safety                      45
    May equally determine.

    _Edm._                 Sir, I thought it fit[4630]
    To send the old and miserable king[4631][4632]
    To some retention and appointed guard;[4631][4633]
    Whose age has charms in it, whose title more,[4634]
    To pluck the common bosom on his side,[4635]                      50
    And turn our impress'd lances in our eyes
    Which do command them. With him I sent the queen:[4636]
    My reason all the same; and they are ready[4636][4637]
    To-morrow or at further space to appear[4637][4638]
    Where you shall hold your session. At this time[4637][4639][4640][4641]  55
    We sweat and bleed: the friend hath lost his friend;[4640][4641]
    And the best quarrels, in the heat, are cursed[4641]
    By those that feel their sharpness.[4641][4642]
    The question of Cordelia and her father[4641]
    Requires a fitter place.[4641]

    _Alb._                   Sir, by your patience,                   60
    I hold you but a subject of this war,[4643]
    Not as a brother.[4643]

    _Reg._            That's as we list to grace him.
    Methinks our pleasure might have been demanded,[4644]
    Ere you had spoke so far. He led our powers,
    Bore the commission of my place and person;                       65
    The which immediacy may well stand up[4645]
    And call itself your brother.

    _Gon._                        Not so hot:[4646]
    In his own grace he doth exalt himself[4646]
    More than in your addition.[4646][4647]

    _Reg._                      In my rights,[4648][4649]
    By me invested, he compeers the best.[4649]                       70

    _Gon._ That were the most, if he should husband you.[4650]

    _Reg._ Jesters do oft prove prophets.

    _Gon._                                Holla, holla![4651][4652]
    That eye that told you so look'd but a-squint.[4652][4653]

    _Reg._ Lady, I am not well; else I should answer
    From a full-flowing stomach. General,
    Take thou my soldiers, prisoners, patrimony;
    Dispose of them, of me; the walls are thine:[4654]
    Witness the world, that I create thee here
    My lord and master.

    _Gon._              Mean you to enjoy him?[4655]

    _Alb._ The let-alone lies not in your good will.[4656]            80

    _Edm._ Nor in thine, lord.

    _Alb._                     Half-blooded fellow, yes.

    _Reg. [To Edmund_] Let the drum strike, and prove my title thine.[4657]

    _Alb._ Stay yet; hear reason. Edmund, I arrest thee[4658]
    On capital treason; and in thine attaint[4659]
    This gilded serpent  [_pointing to Gon._].  For your claim,
        fair sister,[4660]                                            85
    I bar it in the interest of my wife;[4661]
    'Tis she is sub-contracted to this lord,[4662]
    And I, her husband, contradict your bans.[4663]
    If you will marry, make your loves to me;[4664]
    My lady is bespoke.

    _Gon._              An interlude![4665]                           90

    _Alb._ Thou art arm'd, Gloucester: let the trumpet sound:[4665][4666]
    If none appear to prove upon thy person[4667]
    Thy heinous, manifest, and many treasons,
    There is my pledge [_throwing down a glove_]: I'll prove it
        on thy heart,[4668][4669]
    Ere I taste bread, thou art in nothing less                       95
    Than I have here proclaim'd thee.

    _Reg._                            Sick, O, sick!

    _Gon._ [_Aside_] If not, I'll ne'er trust medicine.[4670]

    _Edm._ [_Throwing down a glove_] There's my exchange:
              what in the world he is[4668][4671]
    That names me traitor, villain-like he lies:
    Call by thy trumpet: he that dares approach,[4672]               100
    On him, on you,--who not?--I will maintain[4673]
    My truth and honour firmly.

    _Alb._ A herald, ho!

    _Edm._                    A herald, ho, a herald![4674]

    _Alb._ Trust to thy single virtue; for thy soldiers,[4675]
    All levied in my name, have in my name[4676]                     105
    Took their discharge.[4676][4677]

    _Reg._                My sickness grows upon me.

    _Alb._ She is not well; convey her to my tent.

                                                     [_Exit Regan, led._

                        _Enter a_ Herald.[4678]

    Come hither, herald,--Let the trumpet sound,--[4679][4680]
    And read out this.[4679]

    _Capt._ Sound, trumpet!              [_A trumpet sounds._[4681]  110

    _Her._ [_Reads_] 'If any man of quality or degree within[4682][4683]
    the lists of the army will maintain upon Edmund, supposed[4683]
    Earl of Gloucester, that he is a manifold traitor, let him[4684]
    appear by the third sound of the trumpet: he is bold in[4685]
    his defence.'                                                    115

    _Edm._ Sound!                                [_First trumpet._[4686]

    _Her._ Again!                               [_Second trumpet._[4687]

    _Her._ Again!                                      [_Third trumpet._

                                              [_Trumpet answers within._

       _Enter_ EDGAR, _at the third sound, armed, with a trumpet
                          before him_.[4688]

    _Alb._ Ask him his purposes, why he appears
    Upon this call o' the trumpet.

    _Her._                         What are you?[4689]               120
    Your name, your quality? and why you answer[4689][4690]
    This present summons?[4689]

    _Edg._                Know, my name is lost;[4691][4692][4693]
    By treason's tooth bare-gnawn and canker-bit:[4692][4693]
    Yet am I noble as the adversary[4692][4694]
    I come to cope.[4692][4695]

    _Alb._          Which is that adversary?                         125

    _Edg._ What's he that speaks for Edmund, Earl of Gloucester?

    _Edm._ Himself: what say'st thou to him?

    _Edg._                                        Draw thy sword,
    That if my speech offend a noble heart,[4696]
    Thy arm may do thee justice: here is mine.[4696][4697]
    Behold, it is the privilege of mine honours,[4698]               130
    My oath, and my profession: I protest,
    Maugre thy strength, youth, place and eminence,[4699]
    Despite thy victor sword and fire-new fortune,[4700]
    Thy valour and thy heart, thou art a traitor,
    False to thy gods, thy brother and thy father,[4701]             135
    Conspirant 'gainst this high illustrious prince,[4702]
    And from the extremest upward of thy head
    To the descent and dust below thy foot,[4703]
    A most toad-spotted traitor. Say thou 'No,'
    This sword, this arm and my best spirits are bent[4704][4705]    140
    To prove upon thy heart, whereto I speak,[4704]
    Thou liest.[4704]

    _Edm._ In wisdom I should ask thy name,[4706]
    But since thy outside looks so fair and warlike
    And that thy tongue some say of breeding breathes,[4707]
    What safe and nicely I might well delay[4708]                    145
    By rule of knighthood, I disdain and spurn:[4709]
    Back do I toss these treasons to thy head;[4710]
    With the hell-hated lie o'erwhelm thy heart;[4711]
    Which for they yet glance by and scarcely bruise,[4712]
    This sword of mine shall give them instant way,                  150
    Where they shall rest for ever. Trumpets, speak!

                            [_Alarums. They fight. Edmund falls._[4713]

    _Alb._ Save him, save him![4714]

    _Gon._                     This is practice, Gloucester:[4715][4716]
    By the law of arms thou wast not bound to answer[4715][4717]
    An unknown opposite; thou art not vanquish'd,[4715]
    But cozen'd and beguiled.[4715]

    _Alb._                    Shut your mouth, dame,[4718][4719]     155
    Or with this paper shall I stop it. Hold, sir;[4718][4720]
    Thou worse than any name, read thine own evil.[4718][4721]
    No tearing, lady; I perceive you know it.[4718][4722]

    _Gon._ Say, if I do, the laws are mine, not thine:[4723]
    Who can arraign me for't?[4723][4724]

    _Alb._                    Most monstrous![4725]                  160
    Know'st thou this paper?[4725]

    _Gon._                   Ask me not what I know.      [_Exit._[4726]

    _Alb._ Go after her: she's desperate; govern her.[4727]

    _Edm._ What you have charged me with, that have I done;[4728]
    And more, much more; the time will bring it out:
    'Tis past, and so am I. But what art thou[4729]                  165
    That hast this fortune on me? If thou'rt noble,[4729][4730]
    I do forgive thee.[4729]

    _Edg._             Let's exchange charity.[4731]
    I am no less in blood than thou art, Edmund;
    If more, the more thou hast wrong'd me.[4732]
    My name is Edgar, and thy father's son.                          170
    The gods are just, and of our pleasant vices[4733]
    Make instruments to plague us:[4734][4735]
    The dark and vicious place where thee he got[4734][4736]
    Cost him his eyes.[4734]

    _Edm._             Thou hast spoken right, 'tis true;[4737][4738]
    The wheel is come full circle; I am here.[4737][4739]            175

    _Alb._ Methought thy very gait did prophesy[4740]
    A royal nobleness: I must embrace thee:
    Let sorrow split my heart, if ever I[4741]
    Did hate thee or thy father![4741]

    _Edg._                       Worthy prince, I know't.[4742]

    _Alb._ Where have you hid yourself?[4743]                        180
    How have you known the miseries of your father?[4743][4744]

    _Edg._ By nursing them, my lord. List a brief tale;[4745]
    And when 'tis told, O, that my heart would burst![4745][4746]
    The bloody proclamation to escape[4745][4746]
    That follow'd me so near,--O, our lives' sweetness![4745][4747]  185
    That we the pain of death would hourly die[4745][4748]
    Rather than die at once!--taught me to shift[4745]
    Into a madman's rags, to assume a semblance[4745]
    That very dogs disdain'd: and in this habit[4745][4749]
    Met I my father with his bleeding rings,[4745]                   190
    Their precious stones new lost; became his guide,[4750]
    Led him, begg'd for him, saved him from despair;
    Never--O fault!--reveal'd myself unto him,[4751]
    Until some half-hour past, when I was arm'd;[4752]
    Not sure, though hoping, of this good success,                   195
    I ask'd his blessing, and from first to last
    Told him my pilgrimage: but his flaw'd heart,--[4753][4754]
    Alack, too weak the conflict to support!--[4754]
    'Twixt two extremes of passion, joy and grief,[4754][4755]
    Burst smilingly.[4756]

    _Edm._           This speech of yours hath moved me,             200
    And shall perchance do good: but speak you on;
    You look as you had something more to say.

    _Alb._ If there be more, more woful, hold it in;[4757]
    For I am almost ready to dissolve,
    Hearing of this.[4758]

    _Edg._  This would have seem'd a period[4759][4760][4761][4762]  205
    To such as love not sorrow; but another,[4759][4760][4762][4763][4764]
    To amplify too much, would make much more,[4759][4760][4762][4764][4765]
    And top extremity.[4759][4760]
    Whilst I was big in clamour, came there in a man,[4759][4766]
    Who, having seen me in my worst estate,[4759][4767]              210
    Shunn'd my abhorr'd society; but then, finding[4759][4768]
    Who 'twas that so endured, with his strong arms[4759][4769]
    He fasten'd on my neck, and bellow'd out[4759][4770]
    As he'ld burst heaven; threw him on my father;[4759][4771]
    Told the most piteous tale of Lear and him[4759][4772]           215
    That ever ear received: which in recounting[4759]
    His grief grew puissant, and the strings of life[4759][4773]
    Began to crack: twice then the trumpets sounded,[4759][4774]
    And there I left him tranced.[4759]

    _Alb._                        But who was this?[4759]

    _Edg._ Kent, sir, the banish'd Kent; who in disguise[4759]       220
    Follow'd his enemy king, and did him service[4759][4775]
    Improper for a slave.[4759]

           _Enter a_ Gentleman, _with a bloody knife_.[4776]

    _Gent._ Help, help, O, help![4777][4778]

    _Edg._                       What kind of help?[4779]

    _Alb._                                          Speak, man.

    _Edg._ What means this bloody knife?[4779]

    _Gent._                              'Tis hot, it smokes;[4780][4781]
    It came even from the heart of--O, she's dead![4781][4782]       225

    _Alb._ Who dead? speak, man.[4783]

    _Gent._ Your lady, sir, your lady: and her sister
    By her is poisoned; she hath confess'd it.[4784]

    _Edm._ I was contracted to them both: all three
    Now marry in an instant.

    _Edg._                   Here comes Kent.[4785]                  230

    _Alb._ Produce the bodies, be they alive or dead.

                                                [_Exit Gentleman._[4786]

    This judgement of the heavens, that makes us tremble,[4787]
    Touches us not with pity.

                             _Enter_ KENT.

                                   O, is this he?[4788][4789]
    The time will not allow the compliment[4789][4790]
    Which very manners urges.[4789][4791]

    _Kent._                   I am come[4792][4793]                  235
    To bid my king and master aye good night:[4793]
    Is he not here?

    _Alb._          Great thing of us forgot![4794][4795][4796]
    Speak, Edmund, where's the king? and where's Cordelia?[4795]
    See'st thou this object, Kent?[4795]

                [_The bodies of Goneril and Regan are brought in._[4797]

    _Kent._ Alack, why thus?

    _Edm._                   Yet Edmund was beloved:[4798]           240
    The one the other poison'd for my sake,[4798][4799]
    And after slew herself.[4798][4800]

    _Alb._ Even so. Cover their faces.[4794]

    _Edm._ I pant for life: some good I mean to do,[4801]
    Despite of mine own nature. Quickly send,[4801][4802]            245
    Be brief in it, to the castle; for my writ[4801][4803]
    Is on the life of Lear and on Cordelia:[4801][4804]
    Nay, send in time.[4801]

    _Alb._             Run, run, O, run![4794][4805]

    _Edg._ To who, my lord? Who hath the office? send[4806][4807]
    Thy token of reprieve.[4806]                                     250

    _Edm._ Well thought on: take my sword,[4808]
    Give it the captain.[4808]

    _Alb._      Haste thee, for thy life.     [_Exit Edgar._[4794][4809]

    _Edm._ He hath commission from thy wife and me[4810]
    To hang Cordelia in the prison, and[4810]
    To lay the blame upon her own despair,[4810]                     255
    That she fordid herself.[4810][4811]

    _Alb._ The gods defend her! Bear him hence awhile.[4794]

                                           [_Edmund is borne off._[4812]

  _Re-enter_ LEAR, _with_ CORDELIA _dead in his arms_; EDGAR, Captain,
                        _and others following_.

    _Lear._ Howl, howl, howl, howl! O, you are men of stones:[4813]
    Had I your tongues and eyes, I'ld use them so
    That heaven's vault should crack. She's gone for ever![4814]     260
    I know when one is dead and when one lives;
    She's dead as earth. Lend me a looking-glass;
    If that her breath will mist or stain the stone,[4815][4816]
    Why, then she lives.[4815][4817]

    _Kent._              Is this the promised end?

    _Edg._ Or image of that horror?

    _Alb._                          Fall and cease.[4794][4818]      265

    _Lear._ This feather stirs; she lives. If it be so,[4819]
    It is a chance which does redeem all sorrows[4819][4820]
    That ever I have felt.[4819]

    _Kent._   [_Kneeling_] O my good master![4821]

    _Lear._ Prithee, away.

    _Edg._                 'Tis noble Kent, your friend.

    _Lear._ A plague upon you, murderers, traitors all![4822][4823]  270
    I might have saved her; now she's gone for ever![4822]
    Cordelia, Cordelia! stay a little. Ha![4822][4824]
    What is't thou say'st? Her voice was ever soft,[4822][4825]
    Gentle and low, an excellent thing in woman.[4822][4826]
    I kill'd the slave that was a-hanging thee.[4822]                275

    _Capt._ 'Tis true, my lords, he did.[4827]

    _Lear._                              Did I not, fellow?[4828]
    I have seen the day, with my good biting falchion[4828][4829]
    I would have made them skip: I am old now,[4828][4830]
    And these same crosses spoil me. Who are you?[4828]
    Mine eyes are not o' the best: I'll tell you straight.[4828][4831]  280

    _Kent._ If fortune brag of two she loved and hated,[4832]
    One of them we behold.[4833]

    _Lear._ This is a dull sight. Are you not Kent?[4834]

    _Kent._                                         The same,[4835]
    Your servant Kent. Where is your servant Caius?[4835]

    _Lear._ He's a good fellow, I can tell you that;[4836]           285
    He'll strike, and quickly too: he's dead and rotten.[4837]

    _Kent._ No, my good lord; I am the very man--[4838]

    _Lear._ I'll see that straight.

    _Kent._ That from your first of difference and decay[4839]
    Have follow'd your sad steps.

    _Lear._                       You are welcome hither.[4840]      290

    _Kent._ Nor no man else: all's cheerless, dark and deadly.[4841]
    Your eldest daughters have fordone themselves.[4842]
    And desperately are dead.

    _Lear._                   Ay, so I think.[4843]

    _Alb._ He knows not what he says, and vain is it[4794][4844]
    That we present us to him.

    _Edg._                     Very bootless.                        295

                        _Enter a_ Captain.[4845]

    _Capt._ Edmund is dead, my lord.[4846]

    _Alb._                           That's but a trifle here.[4847][4848]
    You lords and noble friends, know our intent.[4847]
    What comfort to this great decay may come[4847][4849]
    Shall be applied: for us, we will resign,[4847]
    During the life of this old majesty,[4847]                       300
    To him our absolute power:  [_To Edgar and Kent_]  you, to
        your rights;[4847][4850]
    With boot, and such addition as your honours[4847][4851]
    Have more than merited. All friends shall taste[4847][4852]
    The wages of their virtue, and all foes[4852]
    The cup of their deservings. O, see, see![4852][4853]            305

    _Lear._ And my poor fool is hang'd! No, no, no life![4854][4855]
    Why should a dog, a horse, a rat, have life,[4854][4856]
    And thou no breath at all? Thou'lt come no more,[4854][4857]
    Never, never, never, never, never![4854][4858]
    Pray you, undo this button: thank you, sir.[4854][4859][4860]    310
    Do you see this? Look on her, look, her lips,[4860][4861]
    Look there, look there!                               [_Dies._[4860]

    _Edg._                  He faints. My lord, my lord![4862]

    _Kent._ Break, heart; I prithee, break!

    _Edg._                                  Look up, my lord.[4863]

    _Kent._ Vex not his ghost: O, let him pass! he hates him[4864][4865]
    That would upon the rack of this tough world[4864][4866]         315
    Stretch him out longer.[4864]

    _Edg._                  He is gone indeed.[4867]

    _Kent._ The wonder is he hath endured so long:
    He but usurp'd his life.[4868]

    _Alb._ Bear them from hence. Our present business[4869]
    Is general woe.  [_To Kent and Edgar_]  Friends of my soul,
             you twain[4870]                                         320
    Rule in this realm and the gored state sustain.[4871]

    _Kent._ I have a journey, sir, shortly to go;[4872]
    My master calls me, I must not say no.[4872][4873]

    _Alb._ The weight of this sad time we must obey,[4872][4874]
    Speak what we feel, not what we ought to say.[4872]              325
    The oldest hath borne most: we that are young[4872][4875]
    Shall never see so much, nor live so long.

                              [_Exeunt, with a dead march._[4872][4876]

FOOTNOTES:

[4541] The British......] Camp of the British Forces, near Dover.
Capell. A Camp. Rowe.

Enter ...] Ff. Enter Edmund, Reagan, and their powers. Qq. Enter
Bastard, Regan, Gentlemen, and Soldiers. Rowe. Enter Edmund, Regan,
Gentleman and Soldiers. Warburton.

[4542] _alteration_] Q₁ Q₂ (Mus. imp.) Ff Q₃. _abdication_ Q₂ (Cap.
Dev. Mus. per. and Bodl. 1, 2).

[4543] _self-reproving_] Hyphened in Q₁ Q₃.

_self-reproving: bring_] _self-reproving brings_ Pope.

[To ...] Edd. (Globe ed.) To an Officer; who bows, and goes out.
Capell. om. Qq Ff.

[4544] _me, but truly,_] _me--but truly--_ Johnson, _me but truly,_ Q₂
Ff. _me truly_ Q₁ Q₃.

[4545] _In_] Ff. _I_ Q₁ Q₃. _I,_ Q₂. _Ay, in_ Anon. conj.

[4546] Reg. _But ... madam._] Omitted by Johnson.

[4547] Edm. _That ... hers._] Omitted in Ff.

[4548] _I am ... hers._] As in Q₁ Q₃. Prose in Q₂.

[4549] _madam_] om. Pope.

[4550] _I never ... her._] As in Ff. Two lines, the first ending
_endure her_ in Q₁ Q₃. Prose in Q₂.

[4551] _Fear ... husband!_] As in Capell. One line in Qq Ff.

[4552] _me_] Qq. om. Ff.

[4553] _husband!_] _husband._ Qq Ff. _husband--_ Rowe.

Enter ... and Soldiers.] Enter ... soldiers. Ff. Enter Albany and
Gonorill with troopes. Qq (troupes. Q₂. Troops. Q₃).

[4554] Gon. _I ... me._] Arranged as in Theobald. Two lines, the first
ending _battell,_ in Q₁ Q₃. Prose in Q₂. Omitted in Ff.

[4555] [Aside] First marked by Theobald.

_I had_] _I'd_ Theobald.

_lose_] Theobald, _loose_ Q₁ Q₂. _loos_ Q₃.

[4556] _loosen_] _cosin_ Q₃.

[4557] _be-met_] _be met_ Q₃.

[4558] _Sir, this I hear_] Theobald. _For this I heare_ Q₁ Q₂. _Sir,
this I heard_ Ff. _For this I hear_ Q₃. _'Fore this, I hear,_ Malone
conj.

[4559] _Where ... nobly._] Omitted in Ff.

[4560] _for_] _'fore_ Theobald.

[4561] _Not ... others_] _Not the old king with others,_ or _Not holds
with the king, and others_ or _Upholds the king and others_ Mason conj.

_bolds_] _holds_ Pope. _holds to_ Hanmer. _holds for_ Capell. See note
(XIX).

[4562] Edm. _Sir, ... nobly._] Omitted by Pope, reading the rest as Qq.

_nobly_] _odly_ or _coldly_ Mason conj.

[4563] _and particular broils_] _doore particulars_, Q₁. _dore
particulars_ Q₂. _door particulars,_ Q₃. _in-door particulars,_ Collier
conj. (from Q₁). _poore particulars,_ Mitford conj. (from Q₁).

[4564] _the_] Ff. _to_ Qq.

_Let's_] Ff. _Let us_ Qq.

[4565] _Let's ... proceedings._] Arranged as in Q₁ Q₃. Prose in Q₂. In
Ff the first line ends _warre._

[4566] _the ancient_] _the Ancient_ Q₁ Q₃. _the auntient_ Q₂. _th'
ancient_ Ff. _th' ancients_ Hanmer. _the ancient men_ S. Walker conj.
_the argument_ Anon. conj.

_proceedings_] Qq. _proceeding_ Ff.

[4567] Edm. _I shall ... tent._] Omitted in Ff. Transferred by Theobald
to follow _here,_ line 31.

[4568] _pray you_] Qq. _pray_ Ff.

[4569] _O ... riddle._] First marked as 'Aside' by Capell. Hanmer marks
the whole line as 'Aside.'

As ... disguised.] Theobald. Exit. Enter Edgar. Q₁. Enter Edgar. Q₂.
Exit. Enter Edgare. Q₃. Exeunt both the Armies. Enter Edgar. Ff.
Exeunt. SCENE II. Manet Albany. Enter Edgar. Pope. As they are going
out, and Albany last, Enter Edgar. Capell.

[4570] _had_] _did_ Q₃.

_man_] Q₂ Ff. _one_ Q₁ Q₃.

[4571] [Exeunt ...] Exeunt Edm. Reg. Gon. and Attendants. Theobald. om.
Q₁ Ff Q₃. Exeunt. Q₂ (after _word_).

[4572] _wretched_] Qq F₁. _wretch_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

_though_] _thoughts_ Q₃.

[4573] _And ... ceases._] Omitted in Qq.

_love_] Qq. _loves_ Ff.

[4574] _I have_] _I've_ Pope.

[4575] _I was ... again._] Prose in Q₂.

[4576] _o'erlook_] _looke ore_ Q₁. _look ore_ Q₃.

_thy_] Ff. _the_ Qq.

[Exit Edgar.] Dyce. Exit. Qq Ff (after _again,_ line 49).

Re-enter ...] Theobald. Enter ... Qq Ff.

[4577] _enemy's_] _enemies_ Q₂.

[4578] _Here_] _Hard_ Qq.

_guess_] _quesse_ Q₂. _conquest_ Anon. MS. See note (V). _guise_ Becket
conj.

_true_] _great_ Qq.

[Showing a Paper. Collier (Collier MS.)

[4579] _By ... you._] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

[4580] [giving a paper. Jennens.

[4581] [Exit.] om. Q₁ Q₃.

[4582] SCENE III. Pope.

_sisters_] _sister_ Q₂.

[4583] _Each ... enjoyd._] As in Ff. Three lines, ending _adder, ...
one ... enjoyd,_ in Q₁ Q₃. Two lines, the first ending _adder,_ in Q₂.

[4584] _stung_] Ff. _sting_ Qq.

[4585] _Both? one_?] Ff. _both one_ Qq.

[4586] _side_] _suite_ S. Walker conj.

[4587] _who_] Ff. _that_ Qq.

[4588] _the_] Ff. _his_ Qq.

[4589] _intends_] Ff. _entends_ Q₂. _extends_ Q₁ Q₃.

[4590] _Shall never_] _They shall ne'er_ Hanmer. _They shall never_
Keightley.

[4591] SCENE II.] SCENE IV. Pope.

A field ...] Fields between the camps. Capell. A Field. Rowe. Another
open Field. Theobald.

Alarum within. Enter ...] Ff. Alarum. Enter the powers of France over
the stage, Cordelia with her Father in her hand. Qq.

[4592] _tree_] Ff. _bush_ Qq.

[4593] _If ... comfort._] One line in Q₂.

[4594] _go_] _be_ F₃ F₄.

[Exit Edgar.] Pope. Exit. Ff. Exit. Qq (after _comfort_).

Alarum ...] Ff. Alarum and retreat. Qq.

Re-enter ...] Theobald. Enter ... Qq Ff.

[4595] _farther_] Qq. _further_ Ff.

[4596] _What ... endure_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_again? Men_] _againe men_ Q₂.

[4597] _all: come_] _all; come_ Rowe (ed. 2). _all, come_ F₂ F₃ F₄.
_all come_ Qq F₁.

Glou. _And ... too._] Omitted in Qq.

[Exeunt.] Ff. Exit. Q₁ Q₃. om. Q₂.

[4598] SCENE III.] SCENE V. Pope. Theobald continues the Scene.

The British ... near ...] Malone. The British ... under ... Capell. A
Camp. Rowe.

Enter ... Captain, Soldiers, &c.] Enter ... Souldiers, Captaine. Ff.
Enter Edmund, with Lear and Cordelia prisoners. Qq.

[4599] _first_] Ff. _best_ Qq.

[4600] _We ... down;_] Two lines, the first ending _incurd,_ in Q₂.

[4601] _We are_] _We're_ Pope.

[4602] _am I_] Q₁ Q₂. _I am_ Ff Q₃.

[4603] _out-frown_] _out-face_ Anon. conj.

[4604] _No, no, no, no_] Ff. _No, no_ Qq.

[4605] _and sing_] Q₂ Ff. om. Q₁ Q₃.

[4606] _talk_] _talk'd_ F₂.

_too_] _to_ Q₂.

[4607] _loses_] F₄. _looses_ The rest.

_who's ... who's_] _whose ... whose_ Qq. _whos ... whos_ F₂.

[4608] _sects_] _sets_ Johnson conj.

[4609] _The ... thee?_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[4610] _eyes_] Qq F₁. _eye_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[4611] _good-years_] _good yeares_ F₁. _good yeeres_ F₂. _good years_
F₃ F₄. _good_ Qq. _good-jers_ Theobald. _goujeres_ Hanmer. _gougers_
Bubier conj.

_flesh_] Ff. _fleach_ Qq.

[4612] _fell, Ere ... starve first._] _fell: E'er ... weep, ...
starve._ Seymour conj.

[4613] _Ere ... Come._] as in Pope. One line in Q₂. Two, the first
ending _weepe?_ in Ff.

_weep:_] _weep;_ Pope, _weepe?_ Qq Ff. _weep,_ Rowe (ed. 2).

_'em_] Q₃ F₃ F₄. _em_ Q₁, _vm_ Q₂. _e'm_ F₁ F₂. _them_ Capell.

_starve_] Qq. _starv'd_ Ff.

[4614] _Come._] om. Q₁ Q₃.

[Exeunt ...] Theobald. Exit. Q₁ Ff Q₃. om. Q₂. Ex. Lear and Cordelia.
Pope.

[4615] _Come hither_] _Come thou hither_ Hanmer.

[Whispering. Rowe.

[4616] [Giving a paper. Malone.

[4617] _One_] Q₁ Q₂ (Mus. imp.) Ff Q₃. _And_ Q₂ (Cap. Dev. Mus. per.
and Bodl. 1, 2).

_step I_] _step, I_ Q₂.

[4618] _One ... means._] As in Q₂ Ff. Six lines, ending _thee, ...
fortunes: ... is; ... sword, ... question, ... meanes,_ in Q₁ Q₃.

[4619] _tender-minded_] Hyphened by Rowe (ed. 2).

[4620] _thy_] _my_ Theobald.

[4621] _thou'lt_] Ff. _thout_ Qq.

[4622] _thou hast_] Qq. _th' hast_ F₁ F₂. th'ast F₃ F₄.

[4623] _Mark; I_] _Mark, I_ Rowe. _Marke I_ Qq Ff.

[4624] Capt. _I cannot ... do't._] Omitted in Ff.

[4625] _If ... do't_] _But if it be a man's work, I will do it_
Keightley.

_If it_] _If't_ S. Walker conj.

_I'll_] _I will_ Steevens.

[Exit.] Exit Captaine. Ff. om. Qq.

Flourish.] F₁. om. Qq F₂ F₃ F₄.

Enter....] Enter Albany, Gonerill, Regan, Soldiers. Ff. Enter the Duke,
the two Ladies, and others. Qq (Enter Duke Q₂). Enter Albany, Regan,
Goneril, Officers, and Attendants. Capell.

[4626] SCENE VI. Pope.

_shown_] _shewne_ Q₁. _showne_ Q₃. _shewed_ Q₂. _shew'd_ Ff.

[4627] _the_] _them_ Keightley.

[4628] _That_] Qq. _Who_ Ff.

[4629] _We_] Qq. _I_ Ff.

_require them_] Ff. _require then_ Qq.

[4630] _Sir ... fit_] _I thought fit_ Pope.

[4631] _To send ... retention_] As in Q₁ Q₃. One line in Q₂.

[4632] _send_] _saue_ Q₂.

[4633] _and appointed guard_] Q₁ Q₂ (Mus. imp.) Q₃. Omitted in Q₂ (Cap.
Dev. Mus. per. and Bodl. 1, 2) Ff.

[4634] _has_] Qq. _had_ Ff.

[4635] _common bosom_] F₄. _common bosome_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _common bossome_
Q₂ (Mus. imp.), _common blossomes_ Q₁ Q₃. _coren bossom_ Q₂ (Cap. Dev.
Mus. per. and Bodl. 1, 2). _common bosoms_ Pope.

_on_] Ff. _of_ Qq.

[4636] _queen: My reason all_] _queen My reason, all_ Q₂.

[4637] _My ... session._] Arranged as in Ff. The lines end _to
morrow, ... hold_ in Qq.

[4638] _further_] Q₂ Ff. _a further_ Q₁ Q₃.

[4639] _you ... your_] _we ... our_ Hanmer.

[4640] _session ... time We_] Theobald. _session at this time: we_ Q₁
Q₃. _session at this time, wee_ Q₂ (Mus. imp.) _session at this time,
mee_ Q₂ (Cap. Dev. Mus. per. and Bodl. 1, 2).

[4641] _At ... place._] Arranged as in Theobald. The lines end
_bleed, ... quarrels ... sharpenesse ... father ... place_ in Qq.
Omitted in Ff.

[4642] _sharpness_] _sharpenesse_ Q₁ Q₃. _sharpnes_ Q₂ (Mus. imp.),
_sharpes_ Q₂ (Cap. Dev. Mus. per. and Bodl. 1, 2).

[4643] _I hold ... brother._] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

[4644] _might_] Ff. _should_ Qq.

[4645] _immediacy_] F₂ F₃ F₄. _immediacie_ F₁. _immediate_ Qq.

[4646] _Not ... addition._] As in Ff. Two lines, the first ending
_himselfe,_ in Q₁ Q₃. Prose in Q₂.

[4647] _addition_] Ff. _advancement_ Qq.

[4648] _In ... best._] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

[4649] _rights_] Ff. _right_ Qq.

[4650] Gon.] Qq. Alb. Ff.

[4651] _Holla, holla_] F₂ F₃ F₄. _Hola, hola_ Qq F₁.

[4652] _Holla ... a-squint._] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

[4653] _a-squint_] Rowe. _a squint_ Qq Ff.

[4654] _Dispose ... thine._] Ff. Omitted in Qq.

_the walls are_] F₂ F₃ F₄. _the walls is_ F₁. _they all are_ Hanmer
(Theobald conj.) _thy will is_ Jennens. _the whole is_ Anon. conj. _the
laws are_] Anon. conj.

[4655] _him_] Ff. _him then_ Qq.

[4656] _let-alone_] Hyphened by Capell.

[4657] Reg.] Ff. Bast. Qq.

[To Edmund] Malone. om. Qq Ff. To the Bast. They offer to go out.
Hanmer.

_thine_] Ff. _good_ Qq.

[4658] _Stay yet; hear reason._] _Stay hear my reason:_ Hanmer.

[4659] _thine attaint_] Qq. _thy arrest_ Ff.

[4660] [pointing to Gon.] Johnson.

_sister_] Qq. _sisters_ Ff.

[4661] _bar_] Rowe (ed. 2). _bare_ Qq Ff.

[4662] _this_] Q₂ Ff. _her_ Q₁ Q₃.

[4663] _your bans_] Malone. _your banes_ Ff. _the banes_ Qq.

[4664] _loves_] Ff. _love_ Qq.

[4665] Gon. _An interlude!_ Alb.] Omitted in Qq, which read _My
lady ... Gloster_ as one line.

[4666] _Thou ... sound:_] One line in Rowe. Two in Ff.

_armd_] Qq. _armed_ Ff.

_let ... sound:_] Omitted in Qq.

[4667] _person_] Ff. _head_ Qq.

[4668] [throwing ...] Malone. om. Qq Ff.

[4669] _prove it_] Qq. _ma ke it_ F₁. _make it_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _mark it_
Anon. conj. _make good_ Collier MS.

[4670] Gon. [Aside] _If ... medicine._] om. Seymour conj.

[Aside] Marked first by Rowe.

_medicine_] Ff. _poyson_ Qq.

[4671] _he is_] _hes_ F₁.

[4672] _thy_] Qq. _the_ Ff.

[4673] _who_] _whom_ Hanmer.

[4674] Edm. _A ... herald!_] Omitted in Ff.

[4675] _virtue_] _vertues_ F₃ F₄.

[4676] _All ... discharge._] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

[4677] _My_] Ff. _This_ Qq.

[4678] [Exit Regan, led.] Theobald. om. Qq Ff. Exit Reg. Rowe.

Enter a Herald.] As in Collier. After _firmly,_ line 102, in Ff.
Omitted in Qq. After _ho!_ line 103, in Theobald. After _me,_ line 106,
in Capell. After _herald!_ line 103, in Jennens.

[4679] _Come ... this._] Divided as in Q₂ Ff. One line in Q₁ Q₃.
Pointed as by Capell. _herald, let ... sound_, Qq Ff.

[4680] _trumpet_] _Trumper_ F₁.

[4681] Capt. _Sound, trumpet!_] Omitted in Ff.

[A trumpet sounds.] Ff. om. Qq.

[4682] Her. [Reads] Herald reads. Ff. Her. Qq.

[4683] _within the lists_] Ff. _in the hoast_ Qq.

[4684] _he is_] Ff. _he's_ Qq.

[4685] _by_] Ff. _at_ Qq.

[4686] Edm. _Sound_!] Capell. Bast. _Sound._ Q₁ Q₃. Bast. _Sound?_ Q₂.
Omitted in Ff. Continued to Herald by Jennens.

[First trumpet.] 1 Trumpet. Ff. om. Qq.

[4687] Her. _Again!_] Ff. _Againe._ Q₁ Q₃. _Againe?_ Q₂.

[Second trumpet.] 2 Trumpet. Ff. om. Qq.

[4688] Her. _Again!_] Ff. om. Qq.

[Third trumpet.] 3 Trumpet. Ff. om. Qq.

[Trumpet answers within.] Ff. om. Qq.

Enter ... him.] Enter Edgar at the third sound, with a trumpet before
him. Qq (with om. Q₂). Enter Edgar armed. Ff.

[4689] _What ... summons?_] As in Ff. Two lines, the first ending
_quality?_ in Qq.

[4690] _your quality_] _and quality_ Q₁ Q₃. _and qualitie_ Q₂.

_why you_] _why do you_ Keightley.

[4691] _Know_] Ff. _O know_ Qq.

[4692] _Know ... cope._] As in Ff. Three lines, ending _tooth: ...
canker-bit, ... wilh all?_ in Q₁ Q₃. The lines end _tooth ... mou't ...
with all,_ in Q₂.

[4693] _lost; By ... tooth_] Pointed as in Theobald. _lost by treasons
tooth:_ Q₁ Q₃. _lost by treasons tooth._ Q₂. _lost By treasons tooth:_
Ff.

[4694] _Yet am I noble as_] Ff. _Where is_ Q₁ Q₃. _yet are I mou't
Where is_ Q₂.

[4695] _cope._] Ff. _cope with all?_ Q₁ Q₃. _cope with all._ Q₂.

[4696] _That ... arm_] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

[4697] _Thy_] _thine_ Q₃.

_thee_] _the_ Q₃.

[4698] _the ... honours_] Pope. _the priviledge of my tongue_ Qq
(_tougne_ Q₃). _my priviledge, The priviledge of mine honours_ Ff.

[4699] _youth, place_] Qq. _place, youth_ Ff. _skill, youth_ Collier MS.

[4700] _Despite_] _Despight_ Qq. _Despise_ Ff. _Spite of_ Pope.

_victor sword_] Capell. _victor-sword_ Ff. _victor, sword_ Qq.

_fire-new fortune_] Rowe. _fire new fortune_ Ff. _fire new fortun'd_ Qq
(_fier_ Q₃).

[4701] _thy gods_] _the gods_ Q₁ Q₃.

[4702] _Conspirant_] Ff. _Conspicuate_ Qq. _Conspirate_ Capell.
_Conspirator_ Anon. MS. See note (V).

_illustrious_] _illustirous_ F₁.

[4703] _below_] Ff. _beneath_ Qq.

_foot_] F₃ F₄. _foote_ F₁ F₂. _feet_ Qq.

[4704] _This ... liest._] As in Ff. Two lines, the first ending
_spirits,_ in Qq.

[4705] _are_] Ff. _Is_ Q₁ Q₃. _As_ Q₂.

[4706] _should_] _sholud_ Q₂.

[4707] _tongue_] Ff. _being_ Qq.

_some say_] Qq. _(some say)_ Ff. _some 'say_ Pope. _somewhat_ Anon. MS.
See note (V).

[4708] _What ... delay_] Ff. Omitted in Qq.

_well delay_] _claim, delay,_ Eccles conj.

[4709] _By rule_] Ff. _By right_ Qq. _My right_ Anon. MS. See note (V).

[4710] _Back ... head;_] Ff. Omitted in Q₁ Q₃. _Heere do I tosse those
treasons to thy head._ Q₂.

[4711] _With_] _May_ Eccles conj.

_hell-hated lie_] _hell hatedly_ Qq.

_o'erwhelm_] _ore-turn'd_ Q₁ Q₃. _oreturnd_ Q₂.

[4712] _Which ... and scarcely bruise_] _To which ... scarcely
bruising_ Hanmer.

_scarcely_] _scarely_ F₁.

[4713] _they shall_] _thou shalt_ Theobald.

[Alarums. They fight. Edmund falls.] Capell. Alarum. Fight. Bastard
falls. Hanmer. Alarums. Fights. Ff (after _him!_ line 152). Omitted in
Qq.

[4714] Alb.] Amb. (i.e. Both Ladies) or Lad. Theobald conj.

Alb. _Save...._ Gon. _This_] Gon. _O, save him, save him; This_
Theobald. Gon. _Save him, O save him; this_ Hanmer. Gon. _Save him,
save him; this_ Jennens.

[4715] _This ... beguiled._] Arranged as in Ff. Three lines, ending
_armes ... opposite, ... beguil'd,_ in Qq.

[4716] _practice_] Ff. _meere practise_ Qq. _mere practice_ Jennens.

[4717] _arms_] _armes_ Qq. _warre_ Ff.

_wast_] Ff. _art_ Qq.

_answer_] Ff. _answere_ Q₂. _offer_ Q₁ Q₃.

[4718] _Shut ... know it_] As in Ff. Prose in Qq.

[4719] _Shut_] Ff. _Stop_ Qq.

[4720] _stop_] _stople_ Q₂.

_Hold, sir_] Ff. om. Qq. Given to 'Gon.' by Jennens.

[To Edg. Capell MS. and Grant White.

[4721] _name_] Ff. _thing_ Qq.

[4722] _No_] Ff. _Nay, no_ Q₁ Q₃. _nay no_ Q₂.

_No tearing, lady:_] _No tearing.--Lady,_ Johnson.

_know it_] Ff. _know't_ Qq.

[Gives the letter to Edmund. Johnson.

[4723] _Say ... for't?_] As in Ff. One line in Q₂. Prose in Q₁ Q₃.

[4724] _can_] Ff. _shal_ Q₁ Q₂. _shall_ Q₃.

_for't_] _for it_ Q₁ Q₃.

[4725] _Most ... paper?_] As in Capell. One line in Qq Ff.

_Most monstrous! Know'st_] _Most monstrous knowst_ Q₂. _Monster,
knowst_ Q₁ Q₃. _Most monstrous! O, know'st_ Ff.

[4726] Gon.] Qq. Bast. Ff.

_know_] _do know_ Hanmer.

[Exit.] Exit Gonorill. Qq. Exit. Ff (after _for't?_ line 160).

[4727] [To an Officer, who goes out after her. Capell.

[4728] SCENE VIII. Pope.

_What ... done;_] One line in Qq. Two, the first ending _with_, in Ff.

_have I_] _I have_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[4729] _'Tis ... thee._] As in Q₂ Ff. Prose in Q₁ Q₃.

[4730] _thou'rt_] Ff. _thou beest_ Q₁ Q₃. _thou bee'st_ Q₂.

[4731] _Let's_] _Let us_ Capell.

_charity_] _our charity_ Pope.

[4732] _more, the more_] _more than thou, the more then_ Anon. conj.

_thou hast_] Qq. _th' hast_ Ff.

_hast wrong'd_] _then hast wronged_ Grant White conj.

[4733] _vices_] Ff. _vertues_ Q₁ Q₃. _vertues_. Q₂.

[4734] _Make ... eyes._] As in Ff. Two lines, the first ending _place_,
in Q₁ Q₃. Two, the first ending _vitious_, in Q₂.

[4735] _plague us_] Ff. _scourge us_ Qq. _plague and punish us_ Hanmer.
_plague us in their time_ Keightley. _scourge us and to plague us_
Anon. conj.

[4736] _thee he_] Q₂ Ff. _he thee_ Q₁ Q₃.

[4737] _Thou ... here._] Prose in Q₂.

[4738] _Thou hast_] Qq. _Th' hast_ Ff.

_right_] Ff. _truth_ Qq.

_'tis true_] Ff. om. Qq.

[4739] _circle_] Ff. _circkled_ Q₁. _circled_ Q₂. _cirkled_ Q₃.

[4740] [To Edgar. Jennens.

_gait_] Johnson. _gate_ Qq Ff.

[4741] _Let ... father!_] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

_ever I Did_] Ff. _I did ever_ Qq.

[4742] _know't_] _know it_ Q₁ Q₃. _know it well_ Hanmer, ending the
line _prince_.

[4743] _Where ... known_] As one line, S. Walker conj., reading the
previous line with Hanmer.

[4744] _How have you known_] _how known_, S. Walker conj., reading _I
know't ... known_ as one line.

[4745] _By ... rings,_] Arranged as in Ff. The lines end _lord, ...
told ... proclamation ... neere, ... death ... once ... rags, ...
disdaind: ... rings,_ in Qq.

[4746] _burst! The_] _burst. The_ Q₁ Ff Q₃. _burst the_ Q₂.

[4747] _follow'd_] Ff. _followed_ Q₁ Q₂. _followeth_ Q₃.

[4748] _we ... would_] Ff. _with ... Would_ Qq. _with ... wed_ Jennens.

_hourly die_] _hourly bear_ Pope. _hourly fly_ Jervis conj.

[4749] _That_] _The_ Pope.

[4750] _Their_] Ff. _The_ Qq.

_stones_] _gems_ Pope.

_lost; became_] _lost became_ Q₂.

[4751] _O fault!--_] (_O fault_) Ff. (_O father_) Qq.

[4752] _arm'd_] _armed_ Q₂.

[4753] _my_] Qq. _our_ Ff.

_his_] _this_ F₄.

_flaw'd_] _flawed_ Q₂.

[4754] _heart,--Alack ... support!--'Twixt_] _heart, Alack ... support
'Twixt_ S. Walker conj.

[4755] _two_] _too_ Hanmer

[4756] _smilingly_] _smillingly_ Q₂.

[4757] _be more, more_] Q₂ Ff. _any] more more_ Q₁. _any more_ Q₃.

[4758] _Hearing of this_] As in Ff. At the end of line 204 in Q₂.
Omitted in Q₁ Q₃.

[4759] Edg. _This ... slave._] Omitted in Ff.

[4760] _This ... extremity._] Arranged as by Theobald. Three lines,
ending _such ... too much, ... extremity_ in Qq.

[4761] _period_] _pyramid_ Jackson conj.

[4762] _period ... too much,_] _period. But such, As love to amplify
another's sorrow, To much,_ Warburton.

[4763] _but another,_] _but--another,_ Steevens (1773), reading _to
make_ with Capell. _but, another;--_ Steevens (1778).

[4764] _another, To amplify ... more_] _another To amplify, would make
much more too much_ Mitford conj.

[4765] _too_] _to_ Q₃. _truth_ Jackson conj.

_too much_] Hyphened by Capell.

_would make_] _to make_ Capell, putting _To amplify ... extremity_ in
parentheses.

[4766] _came there in_] _came there_ Theobald. _eagerly came in_
Seymour conj., ending line 208 at _big_.

[4767] _worst estate_] _worser state_ Theobald.

[4768] _then_] _now_ Theobald.

[4769] _that_] _had_ Theobald.

[4770] _fasten'd_] Theobald. _fastened_ Qq.

_bellow'd_] _bellowed_ Q₂.

[4771] _threw him_] Theobald. _threw me_ Qq.

[4772] _Told the most_] Q₂. _And told the_ Q₁ Q₃.

[4773] _puissant_] _piersant_ S. Walker conj.

[4774] _crack: twice_] _crack.--Twice_ Theobald. _cracke twice,_ Qq.

_trumpets_] _trumpet_ Johnson.

[4775] _Follow'd_] Theobald. _Followed_ Qq.

[4776] Enter ...] Enter one with a bloody knife. Qq. Enter a Gentleman.
Ff. Re-enter Officer hastily, with a bloody knife. Capell.

[4777] Gent.] Off. Capell.

[4778] SCENE IX. Pope.

_O, help!_] Omitted in Qq.

[4779] Edg. _What kind ... knife?_] Ff. Alb. _What kind of helpe? what
meanes that bloody knife?_ Qq. Edg. _What means that bloody knife?_
Capell.

[4780] _'Tis_] Ff. _Its_ Q₁ Q₂. _It's_ Q₃.

[4781] _'Tis ... dead!_] Arranged as in Capell. One line, ending
_of--_, in Qq. Prose in Ff. Rowe ends the first line _heart._

[4782] _It came_] _it came_ Qq. _came_ Ff.

_O, she's dead!_] Omitted in Qq.

[4783] _Who dead? speak, man._] F₁ F₂ F₃, substantially. _Who man?
speake._ Q₁ Q₃. _Who man, speake?_ Q₂. _Who's dead? Speak man._ F₄.

[4784] _poisoned_] _poysoned_ Q₂. _poyson'd_ Q₁ Ff Q₃.

_hath confess'd_] _hath confest_ Q₂. _has confest_ Q₁ Q₃. _confesses_
Ff.

[4785] Edg. _Here comes Kent._] Ff. Edg. _Here comes Kent sir._ Qq,
after _pity_, line 233.

[4786] _the_] Ff. _their_ Qq.

_alive_] _live_ F₃ F₄.

_dead._] F₃ F₄. _dead;_ Q₁ Q₃. _dead,_ Q₂. _dead;_ F₁. _dead i_ F₂.

[Exit Gentleman.] Edd. To Atten. Capell MS. Exit Gent. Malone, after
_pity_, line 233. om. Qq Ff.

[4787] _judgement_] _iustice_ Qq.

_tremble_,] Qq. _tremble_. Ff.

[4788] _us_] om. Q₁ Q₃.

Enter Kent.] Qq. Enter Kent (after _Kent_, line 230). Ff.

_O, is this he?_] F₁. Alb. _O tis he,_ Qq. _O is this she?_ F₂ F₃ F₄.
_O! it is he._ Steevens (1793).

[4789] _O, ... urges._] As in Ff. Two lines, the first ending _allow_,
in Qq.

[4790] [To Kent. Hanmer.

[4791] _Which_] Ff. _that_ Qq.

_urges_] _urge_ Rowe.

[4792] _I ... night:_] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

[4793] _I am_] _Sir, I am_ Hanmer.

[4794] Alb.] Duke. Q₂.

[4795] _Great ... Kent?_] Arranged as in Q₂ Ff. Prose in Q₁ Q₃.

[4796] _thing_] _things_ Q₁ Q₃.

_forgot!_] _forgot._ Q₁ Q₃. _Forgot,_ Q₂ Ff.

[4797] [Pointing to the dead bodies. Hanmer.

[The ... in.] Qq. Transferred by Dyce to follow line 238. Gonerill and
Regans bodies brought out. Ff, after line 231.

[4798] _Yet ... herself._] As in Q₂ Ff. Prose in Q₁ Q₃.

[4799] _poison'd_] _poysoned_ Q₂.

[4800] _after_] om. Q₃.

[4801] _I pant ... time._] As in Q₂ Ff. Prose in Q₁ Q₃.

[4802] _mine_] Ff. _my_ Qq.

[4803] _Be brief in it, to the_] (_Be briefe in it_) _to' th'_ Ff. _bee
briefe, into the_ Q₁ Q₃. _Be briefe, int toth'_ Q₂.

_castle; for my writ_] Theobald. _castle, for my writ_ F₁. _castle for
my writ,_ Qq. (_write_, Q₃). _chastle for my writ_ F₂. _castle for my
writ_ F₃ F₄.

[4804] _Is_] Q₂ Ff. _tis_ Q₁. _ti's_ Q₃. _It's_ Anon. MS. See note (V).

_and on_] _and_ Hanmer.

[4805] _O, run!_] _O run, make haste._ Hanmer.

[4806] Divided as in Q₂. The first line ends _office?_ in Q₁ Ff Q₃.

[4807] _To who_] Qq F₁. _To whom_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

_hath_] Qq. _has_ Ff.

[4808] _Well ... captain._] As in Ff. One line Q₁ Q₃.

_sword, Give_] _sword the captaine, Give_ Q₂. _sword, The
captain--give_ Jennens.

[4809] Alb.] Q₁ Q₃. Duke. Q₂. Edg. Ff.

[Exit Edgar.] Malone. Exeunt Edgar, and Others. Capell. Exit Messenger.
Theobald. om. Qq Ff.

[4810] _He ... herself._] As in Ff. Prose in Q₁ Q₃. Four lines, ending
_me, ... lay ... despaire ... her selfe,_ in Q₂.

[4811] _That ... herself._] Omitted in Q₁ Q₃.

[4812] [Edmund ... off.] Theobald om. Qq Ff.

Re-enter ...] Dyce. Enter ... Qq Ff.

Lear ...] Lear with Cordelia in his armes. Qq Ff (arms. F₄).

dead] Rowe.

Edgar ... following.] Edgar, and the rest, return. Capell. Edgar,
Officer, and Others. Malone.

[4813] SCENE X. Pope.

_Howl,_] Four times in Qq. Thrice in Ff.

_you_] Qq F₃ F₄. _your_ F₁ F₂.

_stones_] _stone_ Pope.

[4814] _She's_] _O, she is_ Q₁ Q₃.

[4815] _If ... lives._] As in Q₂ Ff. One line in Q₁ Q₃.

[4816] _or_] Q₂ Ff. _and_ Q₁ Q₃.

_stone_] _shine_ Collier MS. _same_ Singer conj.

[4817] _Why, then she_] _she then_ Q₁ Q₃.

[4818] Edg. _Or ... cease._] Omitted by Pope.

_Or ... horror?_] Q₁ Q₃. _Or ... horror._ Q₂ Ff. _Or ... horror--_
Johnson. _O ... horror!_ Capell. _O image of true honour!_ Jennens.

_Fall and cease._] _Fair and chaste!_ Jennens.

[4819] _This ... felt._] As in Q₂ Ff. Prose in Q₁ Q₃.

[4820] _which_] _that_ Q₁ Q₃.

[4821] [Kneeling] Theobald.

_O my_] _A my_ Qq. _Ah! my_ Jennens.

[4822] _A plague ... thee._] As in Q₂ Ff. Prose in Q₁ Q₃.

[4823] _you,_] _your_ Q₂.

_murderers,_] _Murderors,_ F₁. _murtherers,_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _murdrous_ Q₁
Q₃. _murderous_ Q₂.

[4824] _Ha!_] om. Q₁ Q₃.

[4825] _say'st_] _sayst_ Q₁ _sayest_ Q₂. _saist_ Ff. _stay_ Q₃.

[4826] _woman_] Ff. _women_ Qq.

[4827] Capt.] Cap. Qq. Gent. Ff. Off. Capell.

[4828] _Did ... straight._] As in Ff. Prose in Q₁ Q₃. The lines end
_day, ... would ... now, ... you?... straight_ in Q₂.

[4829] _I have_] Q₂ Ff. _I ha_ Q₁ Q₃. _I've_ Pope.

_with my good_] Q₂ Ff. _that with my_ Q₁ Q₃.

_falchion_] _fauchion_ Q₁ Q₃. _fauchon_ Q₂. _faulchion_ Ff.

[4830] _them_] Qq. _him_ Ff.

[4831] _not o' the_] _not othe_ Q₂. _not o' th'_ F₁. _none o'th_ Q₁ Q₃.
_o'th_ F₂. _o' th'_ F₃ F₄.

[4832] _brag_] Ff. _bragd_ Qq.

_and_] Ff. _or_ Qq.

[4833] _we_] _you_ Jennens.

[4834] _This is a dull sight_] Ff. Omitted in Qq. _This is a dull
light_ Jennens. _This sight of mine Is a dull sight_ Capell, ending
line 282 at _mine_.

_This is_] _This'_ S. Walker conj., reading lines 282-284 _One ...
servant Kent_ as two lines, the first ending _sight_.

_you not_] Ff. _not you_ Qq.

[4835] _The same, ... Caius?_] Arranged as in Capell. One line in Qq.
Two, the first ending _Kent,_ in Ff.

[4836] _He's a_] _He's_ F₂. _'Twas a_ Theobald.

_you_] om. Qq.

[4837] _He'll_] _He'd_ Theobald.

[4838] _man--_] Pope. _man._ Qq Ff.

[4839] _first_] Ff. _life_ Qq.

[4840] _Have_] _Hane_ F₂.

_follow'd_] Ff. _followed_ Qq.

_steps._] _steps--_ Rowe.

_You are_] _You'r_ Q₂. _You're ne_ Nicholson conj.

_hither_] _hether_ Q₁.

[4841] _Nor_] _'Twas_ Pope.

_Nor ... deadly._] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_else:_] Qq Ff. _else.--_ Delius, reading _steps--_ in line 290 with
Rowe.

_all's_] _als_ Q₂.

_deadly_] _dead_ Theobald.

[4842] _fordone_] _fore-done_ Ff. _foredoom'd_ Q₁ Q₃. _foredoome_ Q₂.

[4843] _Ay, so I think._] _So I thinke too._ Q₁ Q₃. _So thinke I to._
Q₂.

[4844] _says_] _saies_ F₁. _sayes_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _sees_ Qq.

_is it_] Ff. _it is_ Qq.

[4845] Enter....] Enter Captaine. Qq. Enter a Messenger. Ff (after
_him_). Enter an Officer. Capell.

[4846] Capt.] Q₂. Cap. Q₁ Q₃. Mess. F₁. Mes. F₂ F₃ F₄. Off. Capell.

[4847] _That's ... merited._] As in Ff. Prose in Qq.

[4848] _here_] om. Pope.

[4849] _great_] om. Qq.

[4850] [To Edgar and Kent] Malone. To Edg. Rowe. om. Qq Ff.

_you, to your_] _to you, your_ Pope.

[4851] _honours_] _honor_ Q₂.

[4852] _All ... see!_] Arranged as in Pope. The first line ends _shall_
in Ff. Prose in Qq.

[4853] _O, see, see!_] Given to Lear by Hanmer.

[4854] _And ... sir._] As in Ff. Prose in Qq.

[4855] _poor fool_] _poor soul_ Anon. conj. (Gent. Mag. LX. 402). _pure
soot_ (i.e. _sweet_) Becket conj.

_No, no, no_] Ff. _no, no_ Qq.

[4856] _have_] _of_ Q₂.

[4857] _Thou'lt_] Ff. _O thou wilt_ Qq.

[4858] _Never_] Five times in Ff. Thrice in Qq.

_Never_] _No, never_ Seymour conj.

[4859] _you_] om. Q₁ Q₃.

[4860] _sir. Do ... there!_] _sir, O, o, o, o, o._ Q₁ Q₃. _sir, O, o,
o, o._ Q₂.

[4861] _on her,_] F₂ F₃ F₄. _on her?_ F₁.

_look, her lips,_] Johnson. _Looke her lips,_ F₁. _Looke on her lips,_
F₂. _look on her lips,_ F₃ F₄.

[4862] [Dies.] H e dis. F₁ (Capell's copy). He dyes. F₂. He dies. F₃
F₄. om. Qq.

_My lord, my lord!_] _my lord._ F₄.

[4863] Kent.] Ff. Lear. Qq.

_up,_] _up_ Qq F₁. _to_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[4864] _Vex ... longer._] As in Ff. The lines end _passe, ...
wracke ... longer_ in Qq.

[4865] _hates him_] Q₂ Ff. _hates him much_ Q₁ Q₃.

[4866] _rack_] F₄. _wracke_ Qq F₁ F₂. _wrack_ F₃.

_tough_] _rough_ Q₃ and Pope. See note (XX).

[4867] _He_] Ff. _O he_ Qq.

[4868] _He ... life._] om. Seymour conj.

[4869] Alb.] Ff. Duke. Qq.

[4870] _Is_] Ff. _Is to_ Qq.

[To Kent and Edgar] Johnson.

[4871] _realm_] _kingdome_ Qq.

_gored state_] _gor'd state_ Ff. _good state_ Q₁. _goard state_ Q₂.
_good_ Q₃.

[4872] Kent. _I ... long._] om. Jennens conj.

[4873] _calls me, I_] _cals, and I_ Qq.

[Dyes. F₂. Dies. F₃ F₄. om. Qq F₁.

[4874] Alb.] Pope. Duke. Qq. Edg. Ff.

[4875] _hath_] Ff. _have_ Qq.

[4876] _nor live_] _live e'er_ Hanmer.

[Exeunt ... march.] Ff. Omitted in Qq.




NOTES.


NOTE I.

ACT I. SCENE 1. The acts and scenes are marked throughout in the
Folios, but not in the Quartos.


NOTE II.

I. 1. 25, 26. There is a curious example of careless printing here in
the third Quarto, which reads:

    '_Bast._ No my Lord.

    _Glo._ My services to your Lordship.
    unrable friend.

    _Kent._ I must loue you &c.'


NOTE III.

I. 1. 36. 'and tis our _fast_ intent.' 'This,' says Warburton, 'is
an interpolation of Mr _Lewis Theobald_, for want of knowing the
meaning of the old reading in the Quarto of 1608, and first folio of
1623; where we find it--_and 'tis our_ FIRST _intent_, which is as
_Shakespear_ wrote it.' Warburton's error was corrected by Johnson.


NOTE IV.

I. 1. 80-84. The reading given in the text is that of the Folios,
except as otherwise stated in the foot note. The first Quarto, which is
followed, except in the spelling of a word or two, by the rest, has:

                        'but now our ioy,
    Although the last, not least in our deere loue,
    What can you say to win a third, more opulent
    Then your sisters.'

Pope reads:

                    'Now our joy,
    Although our last, not least; to whose young love,
    The vines of _France_, and milk of _Burgundy_,
    Strive to be int'rest: what say you to draw
    A third, more opulent than your sisters? speak.'

Capell:

                'Now, our joy,
    Although the last, not least in our dear love,
    What can you say, to win a third more opulent
    Than your two sisters?'

Malone first gave the passage exactly as it stands in our text.


NOTE V.

I. 1. 114. This and other anonymous conjectures are found in MS. in
an imperfect copy of the second Quarto of 1608, now in the British
Museum (C. 34. k. 17). Besides those which we have quoted there are
many others made by the MS. corrector which agree either with the other
Quartos or with the Folios.


NOTE VI.

I. 1. 220. Hanmer, adopting Rowe's alteration, reads the whole passage
thus:

                'Sure th' offence
    Must be of such unnatural degree,
    As monsters it; or your fore-voucht affection
    Could not fall into taint; which to believe
    Of her must be a faith reason without
    A miracle should never plant in me.'

The next lines he also alters thus:

    '_Cor._ I yet beseech your Majesty, (if so
    I want that glib and oily art, to speak
    And purpose not, since what I well intend,
    I'll do't before I speak) that you make known &c.'


NOTE VII.

I. 4. 225-228. In this passage Rowe followed the Folios. Pope
introduced some of the lines of the Quartos, making verse of them thus:

    '_Lear's_ shadow? I would learn, for by the marks
    Of sovereignty, of knowledge, and of reason,
    I should be false persuaded I had daughters.
    Your name, fair gentlewoman?'

Theobald and Hanmer followed Pope. So did Warburton, except that in
the second line he read 'Of sovereignty of knowledge, &c.' Johnson and
Capell followed the Folios. Steevens in his edition of 1773 read as
in the text, but in 1778 recurred to the reading of Pope: except that
he transferred 'Lear's shadow?' to the end of the previous line, and
for 'learn' read 'learn that.' Mr Dyce, in his first edition, arranged
lines 225-228 thus:

    '_Lear._ I would learn that; for by the marks of sovereignty,
    Knowledge, and reason,
    I should be false persuaded I had daughters.'

In his second edition he reads:

    '_Lear._ I would learn that; for, by the marks of sovereignty,
    Knowledge, and reason, I should be false-persuaded
    I had daughters.'

Mr Staunton reads 'I would ... reason' as prose, and the next line
as verse. He suggests that "possibly the meaning may be restored
by simply omitting the comma after _sovereignty_, 'by the marks of
sovereignty knowledge and reason,' _i.e._ of _supreme_ or _sovereign_
knowledge, &c." But his later conjecture is that for 'Of sovereignty,
of knowledge' we should read 'Of sovereignly knowledge.' Mr Keightley,
adopting some of the readings of the Quartos, arranges the whole
passage as follows:

    '_Lear._ Does any here know me?--Why, this is not Lear.
    Does Lear walk thus? speak thus? Where are his eyes?
    Either his notion weakens, or his discernings
    Are lethargied.--Sleeping or waking?--Ha!
    Sure 'tis not so.--Who is it that can tell me
    Who I am?

    _Fool._      Lear's shadow,--

    _Lear._                       I would learn that; for by
    The marks of sovereignty, knowledge, and reason,
    I should be false persuaded I had daughters.'

Becket proposes:

    'Who is it that can tell me who I am?
    Lear's shadow? I would learn that; for by the marks
    Of sov'reignty, I should be false persuaded.--
    Of knowledge and of reason I had daughters.'


NOTE VIII.

I. 4. 338. In the imperfect copy of Q₂ in the British Museum 'attaskt
for' was the original reading, but the first two letters of the word
have been erased. In II. 1. 123, 'lest,' the original reading, has been
altered to 'best.'


NOTE IX.

II. 1. 76. We take this opportunity of stating that we have not thought
it worth while, either in this play or in Hamlet, to notice the few
inaccuracies which occur in Steevens's reprints.


NOTE X.

II. 2. 40. Mr Dyce first suggested that 'Part' was intended as a
stage-direction.


NOTE XI.

II. 2. 136-142. The first Quarto, followed substantially by the others,
reads here:

    'His fault is much, and the good King his Master
    Will checke him for't; your purposd low correction
    Is such, as basest and temnest wretches for pilfrings
    And most common trespasses are punisht with,
    The King must take it ill, that hee's so slightly valued
    In his Messenger, should haue him thus restrained.'

The Folios have only the following lines:

    'The King his Master, needs must take it ill
    That he so slightly valued in his Messenger,
    Should haue him thus restrained.'

In the last line the fourth Folio reads 'this' for 'thus.' Rowe
followed the Folios. Pope first introduced the lines from the Quartos,
and gave the arrangement adopted in our text. In the third and the last
lines he introduced readings which we have given in the foot notes. The
passage was first given in Capell's edition as it actually stands in
our text.


NOTE XII.

II. 2. 163. The first Quarto here reads:

    'Of my obscured course, and shall finde time
    From this enormious state, seeking to giue
    Losses their remedies, all weary &c.'

The other Quartos differ only in spelling. The first Folio, followed
substantially by the rest, has:

    'Of my obscured course. And shall finde time
    From this enormous State, seeking to giue
    Losses their remedies. All weary &c.'

Rowe reads:

    'Of my obscured course. I shall find time
    For this enormous State, and seek to give
    Losses their Remedies. All weary &c.'

Pope followed him, but restored 'From' in the second line, and this
reading was silently adopted by Theobald and Warburton, and by Hanmer
in his margin. Johnson thinks the passage very obscure if not corrupt.
Jennens prints it as follows:

[Sidenote: [_Reading parts of the letter._]

    'Of my obscured course--_and shall find time
    From this enormous state--seeking to give
    Losses their remedies_.--All weary &c.'

Steevens (1773) gives as his own conjecture what Jennens had already
published.

Singer (ed. 1) read thus:

    'Of my obscured course; and shall find time
    From this enormous state,--seeking,--to give
    Losses their remedies:--All weary &c.'

Dr Delius adopts nearly the same punctuation:

    'Of my obscured course; and shall find time
    From this enormous state,--seeking to give
    Losses their remedies--All weary &c.'

He supposes that Kent overcome with drowsiness leaves his sentences
unfinished. Mr Bailey (_On the Received Text of Shakespeare's Dramatic
Writings, &c._ II. 91) proposes to read:

                    'and shall find balm
    For this enormous state, seeking to give
    Losses their remedies &c.'


NOTE XIII.

III. 1. 53-55. The first Folio, followed substantially by the rest,
reads thus:

    'That when we have found the King, in which your pain
    That way, Ile this: He that first lights on him,
    Holla the other.'

The Quartos thus:

    'That when we have found the King,
    Ile this way, you that, he that first lights
    On him, hollow the other.'

Pope:

    'That, when we have found the King, (in which you take
    That way, I this:) he that first lights on him,
    Hollow the other.'

Hanmer follows Pope, reading however 'for which' instead of 'in which'
in the first line. Steevens, in his edition of 1773, reads with the
Quartos, adopting the following strange punctuation, and dividing the
lines thus:

    'That when we have found the King. I'll this way,
    You that: he that first lights on him,
    Halloo the other.'


NOTE XIV.

III. 2. 2. Both Capell and Jennens agree in giving 'Your' as the
reading of the Quartos in this line for 'You,' but Capell's own copies
and all others that we have seen read 'You.'


NOTE XV.

III. 4. 112, 113. In the imperfect copy of the second Quarto in the
British Museum, it is impossible to say whether the reading was _&
the pin-queues_ or _the pin-queues_, on account of an erasure by which
it is made _he pin-queues_. Jennens quotes it as _the pin-queues_, and
this is the reading of the copy in the Bodleian Library which we have
called 'Bodl. 1.'


NOTE XVI.

III. 6. 101-114. Every editor from Theobald downwards, except Hanmer,
has reprinted this speech from the Quartos. In deference to this
consensus of authority we have retained it, though, as it seems to us,
internal evidence is conclusive against the supposition that the lines
were written by Shakespeare.


NOTE XVII.

IV. 1. 12. These conjectures of Hanmer's are derived from a letter of
his to Warburton, still unpublished, which is now in the British Museum
(Egerton, 1957).


NOTE XVIII.

IV. 6. 196-200. The first Quarto has in this passage:

    '...  water-pottes, I and laying Autumnes dust.

    _Gent._                                         Good Sir.

    _Lear._ I will dye brauely like a Bridegroome. What, I will bee
    iouiall: Come, come, I am a King my masters, know you that?'

The second Quarto omits '_Gent._ Good Sir.'

The first Folio has:

    'To vse his eyes for Garden water-pots. I wil die brauely,
    Like a smugge Bridegroome. What? I will be Iouiall:
    Come, come, I am a King, Masters, know you that?'

The second and following Folios put a full stop at 'King.'

Pope combines the readings of the Folios and second Quarto thus:

    'To use his eyes for garden-water-pots,
    And laying autumn's dust. I will die bravely,
    Like a smug bridegroom. What? I will be jovial:
    Come, come, I am a King. My masters know you that?'

He is followed by Theobald, Hanmer, Warburton and Johnson.

Capell altered the last line thus:

    'Come, come;
    I am a king, my masters; Know you that?'

The arrangement adopted in our text is that which Steevens gave in his
edition of 1778. Jennens, from whom Steevens borrowed as usual without
acknowledgement, had given in 1770 the same arrangement, omitting the
word 'smug.' In his edition of 1793 Steevens reads 'Ay and _for_ laying
autumn's dust,' making 'Ay ... sir' one line.

Mr Collier prints 'I will die bravely;' in a line by itself, adopting
in the former line the arrangement of Steevens, and in what follows
that of the Folios. Keightley reads 'Ay, and laying autumn's dust ...
bravely' as one line.


NOTE XIX.

V. 1. 26. 'Not bolds the king' is usually interpreted as an elliptical
phrase for 'Not as it emboldens the king.' This is however a very harsh
construction, and the word 'bolds' occurs nowhere else in Shakespeare
with this meaning, though we have, according to the most probable
reading, 'dear'd,' for 'endear'd,' in _Antony and Cleopatra_, I. 4.
44. Possibly these words are corrupt and a line has dropped out before
them. Albany ought to say something of this kind: 'I should be ready to
resist any mere invader, but the presence in the invader's camp of the
king and other Britons, who have just cause of enmity to us, dashes my
courage.'


NOTE XX.

V. 3. 315. Capell reads 'rough' in his text, believing that he had the
authority of the first Quarto for it; but in his own copy and that of
the Duke of Devonshire, the reading is plainly 'tough,' though the 't'
is broken.




OTHELLO.




DRAMATIS PERSONÆ[D].


  DUKE OF VENICE.
  BRABANTIO, a senator.
  Other Senators.
  GRATIANO, brother to Brabantio.
  LODOVICO, kinsman to Brabantio.
  OTHELLO, a noble Moor in the service of the Venetian state.
  CASSIO, his lieutenant.
  IAGO, his ancient.
  RODERIGO, a Venetian gentleman[E].
  MONTANO, Othello's predecessor in the government of Cyprus.
  Clown, servant to Othello.

  DESDEMONA, daughter to Brabantio and wife to Othello.
  EMILIA, wife to Iago.
  BIANCA, mistress to Cassio[F].

    Sailor, Messenger, Herald, Officers, Gentlemen, Musicians, and
                              Attendants.

               SCENE[G]: _Venice: a seaport in Cyprus_.

[D] DRAMATIS PERSONÆ.] THE NAMES OF THE ACTORS. At the end of the play
in F₁ F₂ F₃ (THE ACTORS NAMES. F₂ F₃). THE ACTORS NAMES. Prefixed to
the play first in F₄.

[E] RODERIGO....] RODORIGO, a gull'd Gentleman. Ff.

[F] mistress to Cassio.] a Curtezan. Ff.

[G] SCENE:] First given by Rowe.

                            THE TRAGEDY OF

                               OTHELLO,

                          THE MOOR OF VENICE.




ACT I.


SCENE I. _Venice. A street._

                   _Enter_ RODERIGO _and_ IAGO.[4877]

    _Rod._ Tush, never tell me; I take it much unkindly[4878]
    That thou, Iago, who hast had my purse[4879]
    As if the strings were thine, shouldst know of this.[4880]

    _Iago._ 'Sblood, but you will not hear me:[4881][4882][4883]
    If ever I did dream of such a matter,[4882][4884]                  5
    Abhor me.[4882][4884][4885]

    _Rod._ Thou told'st me thou didst hold him in thy hate.[4886]

    _Iago._ Despise me, if I do not. Three great ones of the
              city,[4887][4888][4889]
    In personal suit to make me his lieutenant,[4888]
    Off-capp'd to him: and, by the faith of man,[4888][4890]          10
    I know my price, I am worth no worse a place:[4888][4891]
    But he, as loving his own pride and purposes,[4888][4892]
    Evades them, with a bombast circumstance[4888][4893]
    Horribly stuff'd with epithets of war;[4888][4894]
    And, in conclusion,[4888][4895][4896]                             15
    Nonsuits my mediators; for, 'Certes,' says he,[4896][4897]
    'I have already chose my officer.'[4896][4898][4899]
    And what was he?[4896][4898]
    Forsooth, a great arithmetician,[4896]
    One Michael Cassio, a Florentine,[4900]                           20
    A fellow almost damn'd in a fair wife;[4900][4901]
    That never set a squadron in the field,
    Nor the division of a battle knows
    More than a spinster; unless the bookish theoric,[4902]
    Wherein the toged consuls can propose[4903]                       25
    As masterly as he: mere prattle without practice[4904]
    Is all his soldiership. But he, sir, had the election:[4905]
    And I, of whom his eyes had seen the proof
    At Rhodes, at Cyprus and on other grounds[4906]
    Christian and heathen, must be be-lee'd and calm'd[4907]          30
    By debitor and creditor: this counter-caster,[4908]
    He, in good time, must his lieutenant be,
    And I--God bless the mark!--his Moorship's ancient.[4909]

    _Rod._ By heaven, I rather would have been his hangman.

    _Iago._ Why, there's no remedy; 'tis the curse of service,[4910]  35
    Preferment goes by letter and affection,[4911]
    And not by old gradation, where each second[4912]
    Stood heir to the first. Now, sir, be judge yourself[4913]
    Whether I in any just term am affined[4914]
    To love the Moor.

    _Rod._            I would not follow him then.                    40

    _Iago._ O, sir, content you;
    I follow him to serve my turn upon him:
    We cannot all be masters, nor all masters
    Cannot be truly follow'd. You shall mark[4915]
    Many a duteous and knee-crooking knave,                           45
    That doting on his own obsequious bondage
    Wears out his time, much like his master's ass,
    For nought but provender, and when he's old, cashier'd:[4916]
    Whip me such honest knaves. Others there are[4917]
    Who, trimm'd in forms and visages of duty,[4917][4918]            50
    Keep yet their hearts attending on themselves,[4917]
    And throwing but shows of service on their lords[4917]
    Do well thrive by them, and when they have lined their
            coats[4919][4920]
    Do themselves homage: these fellows have some soul,[4919][4921]
    And such a one do I profess myself.[4922]                         55
    For, sir,[4923]
    It is as sure as you are Roderigo,
    Were I the Moor, I would not be Iago:
    In following him, I follow but myself;
    Heaven is my judge, not I for love and duty,[4924]                60
    But seeming so, for my peculiar end:[4924]
    For when my outward action doth demonstrate[4925]
    The native act and figure of my heart
    In compliment extern, 'tis not long after[4926]
    But I will wear my heart upon my sleeve                           65
    For daws to peck at: I am not what I am.[4927]

    _Rod._ What a full fortune does the thick-lips owe,[4928]
    If he can carry't thus![4929]

    _Iago._                 Call up her father,[4930]
    Rouse him: make after him, poison his delight,[4930]
    Proclaim him in the streets; incense her kinsmen,[4931]           70
    And, though he in a fertile climate dwell,[4932]
    Plague him with flies: though that his joy be joy,
    Yet throw such changes of vexation on't[4933]
    As it may lose some colour.

    _Rod._ Here is her father's house; I'll call aloud.               75

    _Iago._ Do; with like timorous accent and dire yell[4934]
    As when, by night and negligence, the fire[4935]
    Is spied in populous cities.[4936]

    _Rod._ What, ho, Brabantio! Signior Brabantio, ho!

    _Iago._ Awake! what, ho, Brabantio! thieves! thieves!
              thieves![4937]                                          80
    Look to your house, your daughter and your bags![4938]
    Thieves! thieves![4939]

             BRABANTIO _appears above, at a window_.[4940]

    _Bra._ What is the reason of this terrible summons?[4941]
    What is the matter there?[4941]

    _Rod._ Signior, is all your family within?                        85

    _Iago._ Are your doors lock'd?[4942]

    _Bra._                         Why, wherefore ask you this?

    _Iago._ 'Zounds, sir, you're robb'd; for shame, put on your gown;[4943]
    Your heart is burst, you have lost half your soul;[4944]
    Even now, now, very now, an old black ram[4945]
    Is tupping your white ewe. Arise, arise;                          90
    Awake the snorting citizens with the bell,
    Or else the devil will make a grandsire of you:[4946]
    Arise, I say.[4946][4947]

    _Bra._        What, have you lost your wits?

    _Rod._ Most reverend signior, do you know my voice?

    _Bra._ Not I: what are you?                                       95

    _Rod._ My name is Roderigo.

    _Bra._                      The worser welcome:[4948]
    I have charged thee not to haunt about my doors:[4949]
    In honest plainness thou hast heard me say
    My daughter is not for thee; and now, in madness,[4950]
    Being full of supper and distempering draughts,                  100
    Upon malicious bravery, dost thou come[4951]
    To start my quiet.[4952]

    _Rod._ Sir, sir, sir,--[4953]

    _Bra._                  But thou must needs be sure
    My spirit and my place have in them power[4954]
    To make this bitter to thee.

    _Rod._                       Patience, good sir.[4955]           105

    _Bra._ What tell'st thou me of robbing? this is Venice;[4956][4957]
    My house is not a grange.[4956]

    _Rod._                    Most grave Brabantio,
    In simple and pure soul I come to you.

    Iago. 'Zounds, sir, you are one of those that will not[4958]
    serve God, if the devil bid you. Because we come to do           110
    you service and you think we are ruffians, you'll have your[4959]
    daughter covered with a Barbary horse; you'll have your
    nephews neigh to you; you'll have coursers for cousins,
    and gennets for germans.[4960]

    _Bra._  What profane wretch art thou?                            115

    _Iago._ I am one, sir, that comes to tell you your daughter[4961]
    and the Moor are now making the beast with two backs.[4962]

    _Bra._ Thou art a villain.

    _Iago._                    You are--a senator.[4963]

    _Bra._ This thou shalt answer; I know thee, Roderigo.[4964]

    _Rod._ Sir, I will answer any thing. But, I beseech you,[4965]   120
    If't be your pleasure and most wise consent,[4966]
    As partly I find it is, that your fair daughter,[4966]
    At this odd-even and dull watch o' the night,[4966][4967]
    Transported with no worse nor better guard[4966][4968]
    But with a knave of common hire, a gondolier,[4966][4969]        125
    To the gross clasps of a lascivious Moor,--[4966]
    If this be known to you, and your allowance,[4966][4970]
    We then have done you bold and saucy wrongs;[4966][4971]
    But if you know not this, my manners tell me[4966]
    We have your wrong rebuke. Do not believe[4966]                  130
    That, from the sense of all civility,[4966]
    I thus would play and trifle with your reverence:[4966]
    Your daughter, if you have not given her leave,[4966]
    I say again, hath made a gross revolt,[4966]
    Tying her duty, beauty, wit and fortunes,[4966][4972]            135
    In an extravagant and wheeling stranger[4966][4972][4973]
    Of here and every where. Straight satisfy yourself:[4966][4974]
    If she be in her chamber or your house,[4975]
    Let loose on me the justice of the state
    For thus deluding you.[4976]

    _Bra._                 Strike on the tinder, ho!                 140
    Give me a taper! call up all my people!
    This accident is not unlike my dream:
    Belief of it oppresses me already.
    Light, I say! light!                            [_Exit above._[4977]

    _Iago._              Farewell; for I must leave you:
    It seems not meet, nor wholesome to my place,[4978]              145
    To be produced--as, if I stay, I shall--[4979]
    Against the Moor: for I do know, the state,
    However this may gall him with some check,[4980]
    Cannot with safety cast him; for he's embark'd[4981]
    With such loud reason to the Cyprus wars,[4982]                  150
    Which even now stand in act, that, for their souls,[4983]
    Another of his fathom they have none[4984]
    To lead their business: in which regard,[4985]
    Though I do hate him as I do hell-pains,[4986]
    Yet for necessity of present life,                               155
    I must show out a flag and sign of love,[4987]
    Which is indeed but sign. That you shall surely find him,[4987][4988]
    Lead to the Sagittary the raised search;[4989]
    And there will I be with him. So farewell.                  [_Exit._

      _Enter, below,_ BRABANTIO, _in his night-gown, and_ Servants
                            _with torches_.

    _Bra._ It is too true an evil: gone she is;[4990]                160
    And what's to come of my despised time[4991]
    Is nought but bitterness. Now, Roderigo,[4992]
    Where didst thou see her? O unhappy girl!
    With the Moor, say'st thou? Who would be a father![4993]
    How didst thou know 'twas she? O, she deceives me[4994]          165
    Past thought! What said she to you? Get more tapers.[4995]
    Raise all my kindred. Are they married, think you?[4996]

    _Rod._ Truly, I think they are.[4997]

    _Bra._ O heaven! How got she out? O treason of the blood![4998]
    Fathers, from hence trust not your daughters' minds              170
    By what you see them act. Is there not charms[4999]
    By which the property of youth and maidhood[5000]
    May be abused? Have you not read, Roderigo,
    Of some such thing?

    _Rod._              Yes, sir, I have indeed.[5001]

    _Bra._ Call up my brother. O, would you had had her![5002]       175
    Some one way, some another. Do you know
    Where we may apprehend her and the Moor?

    _Rod._ I think I can discover him, if you please
    To get good guard and go along with me.

    _Bra._ Pray you, lead on. At every house I'll call;[5003]        180
    I may command at most. Get weapons, ho!
    And raise some special officers of night.[5004]
    On, good Roderigo; I'll deserve your pains.         [_Exeunt._[5005]


SCENE II. _Another street._

     _Enter_ OTHELLO, IAGO, _and_ Attendants _with torches_.[5006]

    _Iago._ Though in the trade of war I have slain men,
    Yet do I hold it very stuff o' the conscience[5007]
    To do no contrived murder: I lack iniquity[5008]
    Sometimes to do me service: nine or ten times[5009]
    I had thought to have yerk'd him here under the ribs.[5010]        5

    _Oth._ 'Tis better as it is.[5011]

    _Iago._                           Nay, but he prated
    And spoke such scurvy and provoking terms[5012]
    Against your honour,[8, 9]
    That, with the little godliness I have,[5013]
    I did full hard forbear him. But I pray you, sir,[5014]           10
    Are you fast married? Be assured of this,[5015]
    That the magnifico is much beloved,
    And hath in his effect a voice potential
    As double as the duke's: he will divorce you,[5016]
    Or put upon you what restraint and grievance[5017]                15
    The law, with all his might to enforce it on,[5018]
    Will give him cable.[5019]

    _Oth._               Let him do his spite:
    My services, which I have done the signiory,[5020]
    Shall out-tongue his complaints. 'Tis yet to know--
    Which, when I know that boasting is an honour,[5021]              20
    I shall promulgate--I fetch my life and being[5022]
    From men of royal siege, and my demerits[5023]
    May speak unbonneted to as proud a fortune[5024]
    As this that I have reach'd: for know, Iago,
    But that I love the gentle Desdemona,                             25
    I would not my unhoused free condition
    Put into circumscription and confine
    For the sea's worth. But, look! what lights come yond?[5025]

    _Iago._ Those are the raised father and his friends:[5026]
    You were best go in.

    _Oth._               Not I; I must be found:                      30
    My parts, my title and my perfect soul,[5027]
    Shall manifest me rightly. Is it they?[5028]

    _Iago._ By Janus, I think no.

      _Enter_ CASSIO, _and certain_ Officers _with torches_.[5029]

    _Oth._ The servants of the duke, and my lieutenant.[5030]
    The goodness of the night upon you, friends![5031]                35
    What is the news?[5032]

    _Cas._            The duke does greet you, general,
    And he requires your haste-post-haste appearance,[5033]
    Even on the instant.

    _Oth._               What is the matter, think you?[5034]

    _Cas._ Something from Cyprus, as I may divine;
    It is a business of some heat: the galleys                        40
    Have sent a dozen sequent messengers[5035]
    This very night at one anothers heels;[5036]
    And many of the consuls, raised and met,[5037]
    Are at the dukes already: you have been hotly call'd for;[5038]
    When, being not at your lodging to be found,                      45
    The senate hath sent about three several quests[5039]
    To search you out.

    _Oth._             'Tis well I am found by you.
    I will but spend a word here in the house,[5040]
    And go with you.                                [_Exit._[5040][5041]

    _Cas._           Ancient, what makes he here?

    _Iago._ Faith, he to-night hath boarded a land carack:[5042]      50
    If it prove lawful prize, he's made for ever.

    _Cas._ I do not understand.

    _Iago._                     He's married.

    _Cas._                                    To who?

                       _Re-enter_ OTHELLO.[5043]

    _Iago._ Marry, to--Come, captain, will you go?

    _Oth._                                         Have with you.[5044]

    _Cas._ Here comes another troop to seek for you.

    _Iago._ It is Brabantio: general, be advised;[5045]               55
    He comes to bad intent.

     _Enter_ BRABANTIO, RODERIGO, _and_ Officers _with torches and
                               weapons_.

    _Oth._                  Holla! stand there![5046]

    _Rod._ Signior, it is the Moor.

    _Bra._                          Down with him, thief!

                                      [_They draw on both sides._[5047]

    _Iago._ You, Roderigo! come, sir, I am for you.

    _Oth._ Keep up your bright swords, for the dew will rust
              them.[5048][5049]
    Good signior, you shall more command with years[5048]             60
    Than with your weapons.[5048]

    _Bra._ O thou foul thief, where hast thou stow'd my daughter?[5050]
    Damn'd as thou art, thou hast enchanted her;[5051]
    For I'll refer me to all things of sense,[5052]
    If she in chains of magic were not bound,[5053]                   65
    Whether a maid so tender, fair and happy,
    So opposite to marriage that she shunn'd
    The wealthy curled darlings of our nation,[5054]
    Would ever have, to incur a general mock,[5055]
    Run from her guardage to the sooty bosom[5056]                    70
    Of such a thing as thou, to fear, not to delight.[5057]
    Judge me the world, if 'tis not gross in sense[5058][5059]
    That thou hast practised on her with foul charms,[5058]
    Abused her delicate youth with drugs or minerals[5058][5060]
    That weaken motion: I'll have 't disputed on;[5058][5061]         75
    'Tis probable, and palpable to thinking.[5058][5062]
    I therefore apprehend and do attach thee[5058]
    For an abuser of the world, a practiser[5063]
    Of arts inhibited and out of warrant.[5064]
    Lay hold upon him: if he do resist,                               80
    Subdue him at his peril.

    _Oth._                   Hold your hands,[5065]
    Both you of my inclining and the rest:
    Were it my cue to fight, I should have known it[5066]
    Without a prompter. Where will you that I go[5067]
    To answer this your charge?[5068]

    _Bra._                      To prison, till fit time[5069]        85
    Of law and course of direct session[5069]
    Call thee to answer.[5070]

    _Oth._               What if I do obey?
    How may the duke be therewith satisfied,
    Whose messengers are here about my side,
    Upon some present business of the state                           90
    To bring me to him?[5071]

    _First Off._        'Tis true, most worthy signior;
    The duke's in council, and your noble self,
    I am sure, is sent for.[5072]

    _Bra._                  How! the duke in council!
    In this time of the night! Bring him away:[5073]
    Mine's not an idle cause: the duke himself,                       95
    Or any of my brothers of the state,
    Cannot but feel this wrong as 'twere their own;
    For if such actions may have passage free,
    Bond-slaves and pagans shall our statesmen be.      [_Exeunt._[5074]


SCENE III. _A council-chamber._

_The_ Duke _and_ Senators _sitting at a table_; Officers _attending_.[5075]

    _Duke._ There is no composition in these news[5076]
    That gives them credit.

    _First Sen._            Indeed they are disproportion'd;[5077]
    My letters say a hundred and seven galleys.[5078]

    _Duke._ And mine, a hundred and forty.

    _Sec. Sen._                             And mine, two hundred:[5079]
    But though they jump not on a just account,--                      5
    As in these cases, where the aim reports,[5080]
    'Tis oft with difference,--yet do they all confirm[5081]
    A Turkish fleet, and bearing up to Cyprus.

    _Duke._ Nay, it is possible enough to judgement:
    I do not so secure me in the error,[5082]                         10
    But the main article I do approve[5083]
    In fearful sense.

    _Sailor._ [_Within_] What, ho! what, ho! what, ho![5084]

    _First Off._ A messenger from the galleys.

                         _Enter_ Sailor.[5085]

    _Duke._                                    Now, what's the business?

    _Sail._ The Turkish preparation makes for Rhodes;
    So was I bid report here to the state[5086]                       15
    By Signior Angelo.[5086][5087]

    _Duke._ How say you by this change?

    _First Sen._                        This cannot be,[5088]
    By no assay of reason: 'tis a pageant[5088]
    To keep us in false gaze. When we consider
    The importancy of Cyprus to the Turk,                             20
    And let ourselves again but understand
    That as it more concerns the Turk than Rhodes,
    So may he with more facile question bear it,[5089]
    For that it stands not in such warlike brace,[5090]
    But altogether lacks the abilities[5090][5091]                    25
    That Rhodes is dress'd in: if we make thought of this,[5090][5092]
    We must not think the Turk is so unskilful[5090]
    To leave that latest which concerns him first,[5090]
    Neglecting an attempt of ease and gain,[5090][5093]
    To wake and wage a danger profitless.[5090][5093]                 30

    _Duke._ Nay, in all confidence, he's not for Rhodes.[5094]

    _First Off._ Here is more news.

                       _Enter a_ Messenger.[5095]

    _Mess._ The Ottomites, reverend and gracious,
    Steering with due course toward the isle of Rhodes,
    Have there injointed them with an after fleet.[5096]              35

    _First Sen._ Ay, so I thought. How many, as you guess?[5097]

    _Mess._ Of thirty sail: and now they do re-stem[5098]
    Their backward course, bearing with frank appearance
    Their purposes toward Cyprus. Signior Montano,[5099]
    Your trusty and most valiant servitor,                            40
    With his free duty recommends you thus,[5100]
    And prays you to believe him.[5101]

    _Duke._ 'Tis certain then for Cyprus.
    Marcus Luccicos, is not he in town?[5102]

    _First Sen._ He's now in Florence.                                45

    _Duke._ Write from us to him; post-post-haste dispatch.[5103]

    _First Sen._ Here comes Brabantio and the valiant Moor.

  _Enter_ BRABANTIO, _Othello_, IAGO, RODERIGO, _and_ Officers.[5104]

    _Duke._ Valiant Othello, we must straight employ you[5105]
    Against the general enemy Ottoman.
    [_To Brabantio_] I did not see you; welcome, gentle signior;[5106]  50
    We lack'd your counsel and your help to-night.[5107]

    _Bra._ So did I yours. Good your grace, pardon me;
    Neither my place nor aught I heard of business[5108]
    Hath raised me from my bed, nor doth the general care[5109]
    Take hold on me; for my particular grief[5110]                    55
    Is of so flood-gate and o'erbearing nature
    That it engluts and swallows other sorrows,[5111]
    And it is still itself.[5112]

    _Duke._                 Why, what's the matter?

    _Bra._ My daughter! O, my daughter!

    _All._                              Dead?

    _Bra._                                    Ay, to me;[5113]
    She is abused, stol'n from me and corrupted                       60
    By spells and medicines bought of mountebanks;
    For nature so preposterously to err,[5114]
    Being not deficient, blind, or lame of sense,[5115]
    Sans witchcraft could not.[5116]

    _Duke._ Whoe'er he be that in this foul proceeding                65
    Hath thus beguiled your daughter of herself
    And you of her, the bloody book of law
    You shall yourself read in the bitter letter
    After your own sense, yea, though our proper son[5117]
    Stood in your action.

    _Bra._                Humbly I thank your grace.                  70
    Here is the man, this Moor; whom now, it seems,
    Your special mandate for the state-affairs
    Hath hither brought.

    _All._               We are very sorry for't.[5118]

    _Duke._ [_To Othello_] What in your own part can you say to this?[5119]

    _Bra._ Nothing, but this is so.                                   75

    _Oth._ Most potent, grave, and reverend signiors,
    My very noble and approved good masters,
    That I have ta'en away this old man's daughter,
    It is most true; true, I have married her:
    The very head and front of my offending                           80
    Hath this extent, no more. Rude am I in my speech,[5120]
    And little blest with the soft phrase of peace;[5121]
    For since these arms of mine had seven years' pith,
    Till now some nine moons wasted, they have used[5122]
    Their dearest action in the tented field;                         85
    And little of this great world can I speak,
    More than pertains to feats of broil and battle;[5123]
    And therefore little shall I grace my cause
    In speaking for myself. Yet, by your gracious patience,[5124]
    I will a round unvarnish'd tale deliver[5125]                     90
    Of my whole course of love; what drugs, what charms,[5126]
    What conjuration and what mighty magic--
    For such proceeding I am charged withal--[5127]
    I won his daughter.[5128]

    _Bra._              A maiden never bold;[5129]
    Of spirit so still and quiet that her motion[5129]                95
    Blush'd at herself; and she--in spite of nature,[5130]
    Of years, of country, credit, every thing--
    To fall in love with what she fear'd to look on![5131]
    It is a judgement maim'd and most imperfect[5132]
    That will confess perfection so could err[5133]                  100
    Against all rules of nature; and must be driven
    To find out practices of cunning hell,
    Why this should be. I therefore vouch again,
    That with some mixtures powerful o'er the blood,
    Or with some dram conjured to this effect,                       105
    He wrought upon her.

    _Duke._              To vouch this, is no proof,[5134]
    Without more certain and more overt test[5135]
    Than these thin habits and poor likelihoods[5136]
    Of modern seeming do prefer against him.[5137]

    _First Sen._ But, Othello, speak:[5138]                          110
    Did you by indirect and forced courses
    Subdue and poison this young maid's affections?
    Or came it by request, and such fair question
    As soul to soul affordeth?

    _Oth._                     I do beseech you,[5139]
    Send for the lady to the Sagittary,[5140]                        115
    And let her speak of me before her father:
    If you do find me foul in her report,
    The trust, the office I do hold of you,[5141]
    Not only take away, but let your sentence
    Even fall upon my life.[5142]

    _Duke._                 Fetch Desdemona hither.                  120

    _Oth._ Ancient, conduct them; you best know the place.

                                   [_Exeunt Iago and Attendants._[5143]

    And till she come, as truly as to heaven[5144]
    I do confess the vices of my blood,[5145]
    So justly to your grave ears I'll present
    How I did thrive in this fair lady's love                        125
    And she in mine.

    _Duke._ Say it, Othello.

    _Oth._ Her father loved me, oft invited me,
    Still question'd me the story of my life[5146]
    From year to year, the battles, sieges, fortunes,[5147]          130
    That I have pass'd.[5148]
    I ran it through, even from my boyish days[5149]
    To the very moment that he bade me tell it:
    Wherein I spake of most disastrous chances,[5150]
    Of moving accidents by flood and field,[5151]                    135
    Of hair-breadth 'scapes i' the imminent deadly breach,[5152]
    Of being taken by the insolent foe,
    And sold to slavery, of my redemption thence,[5153]
    And portance in my travels' history:[5154]
    Wherein of antres vast and deserts idle,[5155]                   140
    Rough quarries, rocks, and hills whose heads touch heaven,[5156]
    It was my hint to speak,--such was the process;[5157][5158][5159]
    And of the Cannibals that each other eat,[5158][5160]
    The Anthropophagi, and men whose heads[5158][5161]
    Do grow beneath their shoulders. This to hear[5158][5162]        145
    Would Desdemona seriously incline:
    But still the house-affairs would draw her thence;[5163]
    Which ever as she could with haste dispatch,[5164]
    She'ld come again, and with a greedy ear
    Devour up my discourse: which I observing,                       150
    Took once a pliant hour, and found good means
    To draw from her a prayer of earnest heart
    That I would all my pilgrimage dilate,
    Whereof by parcels she had something heard,[5165]
    But not intentively: I did consent,[5166]                        155
    And often did beguile her of her tears
    When I did speak of some distressful stroke[5167]
    That my youth suffer'd. My story being done,[5168]
    She gave me for my pains a world of sighs:[5169]
    She swore, in faith, 'twas strange, 'twas passing strange;[5170]  160
    'Twas pitiful, 'twas wondrous pitiful:
    She wish'd she had not heard it, yet she wish'd
    That heaven had made her such a man: she thank'd me,[5171]
    And bade me, if I had a friend that loved her,
    I should but teach him how to tell my story,                     165
    And that would woo her. Upon this hint I spake:[5172]
    She loved me for the dangers I had pass'd,[5173]
    And I loved her that she did pity them.
    This only is the witchcraft I have used.
    Here comes the lady; let her witness it.                         170

            _Enter_ DESDEMONA, IAGO, _and_ Attendants.[5174]

    _Duke._ I think this tale would win my daughter too.[5175]
    Good Brabantio,[5176]
    Take up this mangled matter at the best:[5176]
    Men do their broken weapons rather use
    Than their bare hands.

    _Bra._                 I pray you, hear her speak:               175
    If she confess that she was half the wooer,
    Destruction on my head, if my bad blame[5177]
    Light on the man! Come hither, gentle mistress:
    Do you perceive in all this noble company[5178]
    Where most you owe obedience?

    _Des._                        My noble father,[5179]             180
    I do perceive here a divided duty:
    To you I am bound for life and education;[5180]
    My life and education both do learn me
    How to respect you; you are the lord of duty,[5181]
    I am hitherto your daughter: but here's my husband,[5180]        185
    And so much duty as my mother show'd[5182]
    To you, preferring you before her father,
    So much I challenge that I may profess[5183]
    Due to the Moor my lord.

    _Bra._                   God be with you! I have done.[5184]
    Please it your grace, on to the state-affairs:                   190
    I had rather to adopt a child than get it.[5185]
    Come hither, Moor:
    I here do give thee that with all my heart,
    Which, but thou hast already, with all my heart[5186]
    I would keep from thee. For your sake, jewel,[5187]              195
    I am glad at soul I have no other child;[5180][5188]
    For thy escape would teach me tyranny,
    To hang clogs on them. I have done, my lord.[5189]

    _Duke_. Let me speak like yourself, and lay a sentence[5190]
    Which, as a grise or step, may help these lovers[5191]           200
    Into your favour.[5192]
    When remedies are past, the griefs are ended[5193]
    By seeing the worst, which late on hopes depended.[5194]
    To mourn a mischief that is past and gone
    Is the next way to draw new mischief on.[5195]                   205
    What cannot be preserved when fortune takes,
    Patience her injury a mockery makes.[5196]
    The robb'd that smiles steals something from the thief;[5197]
    He robs himself that spends a bootless grief.

    _Bra_. So let the Turk of Cyprus us beguile;[5198]               210
    We lose it not so long as we can smile.[5199]
    He bears the sentence well, that nothing bears[5200]
    But the free comfort which from thence he hears;[5200]
    But he bears both the sentence and the sorrow,[5201]
    That, to pay grief, must of poor patience borrow.                215
    These sentences, to sugar or to gall,
    Being strong on both sides, are equivocal:
    But words are words; I never yet did hear
    That the bruised heart was pierced through the ear.[5202]
    I humbly beseech you, proceed to the affairs of state.[5203]     220

    _Duke._ The Turk with a most mighty preparation makes[5204]
    for Cyprus. Othello, the fortitude of the place is best
    known to you; and though we have there a substitute of[5205]
    most allowed sufficiency, yet opinion, a sovereign mistress[5206]
    of effects, throws a more safer voice on you: you must[5207]     225
    therefore be content to slubber the gloss of your new fortunes[5208]
    with this more stubborn and boisterous expedition.[5209]

    _Oth._ The tyrant custom, most grave senators,[5210]
    Hath made the flinty and steel couch of war[5211]
    My thrice-driven bed of down: I do agnize                        230
    A natural and prompt alacrity[5212]
    I find in hardness; and do undertake[5213]
    These present wars against the Ottomites.[5214]
    Most humbly therefore bending to your state,
    I crave fit disposition for my wife,                             235
    Due reference of place and exhibition,[5215]
    With such accommodation and besort[5216]
    As levels with her breeding.

    _Duke._                      If you please,[5217]
    Be 't at her father's.[5217]

    _Bra._                 I'll not have it so.[5218]

    _Oth._ Nor I.

    _Des._        Nor I, I would not there reside,[5219]             240
    To put my father in impatient thoughts
    By being in his eye. Most gracious duke,
    To my unfolding lend your prosperous ear,[5220]
    And let me find a charter in your voice[5221]
    To assist my simpleness.[5222]                                   245

    _Duke._ What would you, Desdemona?[5223]

    _Des._ That I did love the Moor to live with him,[5224]
    My downright violence and storm of fortunes[5225]
    May trumpet to the world: my heart's subdued[5226]
    Even to the very quality of my lord:[5227]                       250
    I saw Othello's visage in his mind,
    And to his honours and his valiant parts
    Did I my soul and fortunes consecrate.
    So that, dear lords, if I be left behind,[5228]
    A moth of peace, and he go to the war,                           255
    The rites for which I love him are bereft me,[5229]
    And I a heavy interim shall support
    By his dear absence. Let me go with him.

    _Oth._ Let her have your voices.[5230]
    Vouch with me, heaven, I therefore beg it not,[5231]             260
    To please the palate of my appetite;
    Nor to comply with heat--the young affects[5232][5233]
    In me defunct--and proper satisfaction;[5232][5234]
    But to be free and bounteous to her mind:[5234][5235]
    And heaven defend your good souls, that you think[5236]          265
    I will your serious and great business scant[5237]
    For she is with me. No, when light-wing'd toys[5238]
    Of feather'd Cupid seel with wanton dullness[5239]
    My speculative and officed instruments,[5240]
    That my disports corrupt and taint my business,                  270
    Let housewives make a skillet of my helm,[5241]
    And all indign and base adversities
    Make head against my estimation![5242]

    _Duke._ Be it as you shall privately determine,
    Either for her stay or going: the affair cries haste,[5243]      275
    And speed must answer 't; you must hence to-night.[5244]

    _Des._ To-night, my lord?[5245]

    _Duke._                   This night.

    _Oth._                                With all my heart.

    _Duke._ At nine i' the morning here we'll meet again.[5246]
    Othello, leave some officer behind,
    And he shall our commission bring to you;                        280
    With such things else of quality and respect[5247]
    As doth import you.

    _Oth._              So please your grace, my ancient;[5248]
    A man he is of honesty and trust:
    To his conveyance I assign my wife,
    With what else needful your good grace shall think[5249]         285
    To be sent after me.

    _Duke._              Let it be so.
    Good night to every one. [_To Brab._] And, noble signior,[5250]
    If virtue no delighted beauty lack,[5251]
    Your son-in-law is far more fair than black.

    _First Sen._ Adieu, brave Moor; use Desdemona well.[5252]        290

    _Bra._ Look to her, Moor, if thou hast eyes to see:[5253]
    She has deceived her father, and may thee.

                           [_Exeunt Duke, Senators, Officers, &c._[5254]

    _Oth._ My life upon her faith! Honest Iago,
    My Desdemona must I leave to thee:
    I prithee, let thy wife attend on her;                           295
    And bring them after in the best advantage.[5255]
    Come, Desdemona; I have but an hour
    Of love, of worldly matters and direction,[5256]
    To spend with thee: we must obey the time.

                                 [_Exeunt Othello and Desdemona._[5257]

    _Rod._ Iago![5258]                                               300

    _Iago._ What say'st thou, noble heart?

    _Rod._ What will I do, thinkest thou?[5259]

    _Iago._ Why, go to bed and sleep.

    _Rod._ I will incontinently drown myself.

    _Iago._ If thou dost, I shall never love thee after. Why,[5260]  305
    thou silly gentleman![5261]

    _Rod._ It is silliness to live when to live is torment; and[5262]
    then have we a prescription to die when death is our physician.[5263]

    _Iago._ O villanous! I have looked upon the world for[5264]      310
    four times seven years; and since I could distinguish betwixt[5265]
    a benefit and an injury, I never found man that knew[5266]
    how to love himself. Ere I would say I would drown myself
    for the love of a guinea-hen, I would change my humanity[5267]
    with a baboon.                                                   315

    _Rod._ What should I do? I confess it is my shame to
    be so fond; but it is not in my virtue to amend it.

    _Iago._ Virtue! a fig! 'tis in ourselves that we are thus
    or thus. Our bodies are gardens; to the which our wills[5268]
    are gardeners: so that if we will plant nettles or sow lettuce,  320
    set hyssop and weed up thyme, supply it with one[5269]
    gender of herbs or distract it with many, either to have[5270]
    it sterile with idleness or manured with industry, why, the
    power and corrigible authority of this lies in our wills. If[5271]
    the balance of our lives had not one scale of reason to poise[5272]  325
    another of sensuality, the blood and baseness of our natures
    would conduct us to most preposterous conclusions: but we
    have reason to cool our raging motions, our carnal stings,[5273]
    our unbitted lusts; whereof I take this, that you call love,[5274]
    to be a sect or scion.[5275]                                     330

    _Rod._ It cannot be.

    _Iago._ It is merely a lust of the blood and a permission[5276]
    of the will. Come, be a man: drown thyself! drown cats
    and blind puppies. I have professed me thy friend, and I[5277]
    confess me knit to thy deserving with cables of perdurable       335
    toughness: I could never better stead thee than now. Put[5278]
    money in thy purse; follow thou the wars; defeat thy favour[5279]
    with an usurped beard; I say, put money in thy purse.
    It cannot be that Desdemona should long continue her love[5280]
    to the Moor--put money in thy purse--nor he his to her: it[5281]  340
    was a violent commencement, and thou shalt see an[5282][5283]
    answerable sequestration; put but money in thy purse. These[5283][5284]
    Moors are changeable in their wills:--fill thy purse with
    money. The food that to him now is as luscious as locusts,[5285]
    shall be to him shortly as bitter as coloquintida.  She[5286][5287]  345
    must change for youth: when she is sated with his body,[5287]
    she will find the error of her choice: she must have change,[5288][5289]
    she must: therefore put money in thy purse. If thou wilt[5289]
    needs damn thyself, do it a more delicate way than drowning.
    Make all the money thou canst: if sanctimony and a               350
    frail vow betwixt an erring barbarian and a supersubtle[5290]
    Venetian be not too hard for my wits and all the tribe of
    hell, thou shalt enjoy her; therefore make money. A pox
    of drowning thyself! it is clean out of the way: seek thou[5291]
    rather to be hanged in compassing thy joy than to be             355
    drowned and go without her.

    _Rod._ Wilt thou be fast to my hopes, if I depend on[5292]
    the issue?[5292]

    _Iago._ Thou art sure of me: go, make money: I have
    told thee often, and I re-tell thee again and again, I hate[5293]  360
    the Moor: my cause is hearted; thine hath no less reason.[5294]
    Let us be conjunctive in our revenge against him: if thou[5295]
    canst cuckold him, thou dost thyself a pleasure, me a sport.[5296]
    There are many events in the womb of time, which will be
    delivered.  Traverse; go; provide thy money. We will             365
    have more of this to-morrow. Adieu.

    _Rod._ Where shall we meet i' the morning?

    _Iago._ At my lodging.

    _Rod._ I'll be with thee betimes.

    _Iago._ Go to; farewell. Do you hear, Roderigo?[5297][5298]      370

    _Rod._ What say you?[5297]

    _Iago._ No more of drowning, do you hear?[5297]

    _Rod._ I am changed: I'll go sell all my land.  [_Exit._[5297][5299]

    _Iago._ Thus do I ever make my fool my purse;[5297][5300]
    For I mine own gain'd knowledge should profane,                  375
    If I would time expend with such a snipe[5301]
    But for my sport and profit. I hate the Moor;
    And it is thought abroad that 'twixt my sheets
    He has done my office: I know not if't be true;[5302]
    But I for mere suspicion in that kind[5303]                      380
    Will do as if for surety. He holds me well;
    The better shall my purpose work on him.
    Cassio's a proper man: let me see now;
    To get his place, and to plume up my will[5304]
    In double knavery--How, how?--Let's see:--[5305]                 385
    After some time, to abuse Othello's ear[5306]
    That he is too familiar with his wife.[5307]
    He hath a person and a smooth dispose
    To be suspected; framed to make women false.
    The Moor is of a free and open nature,[5308]                     390
    That thinks men honest that but seem to be so;[5309]
    And will as tenderly be led by the nose[5310][5311]
    As asses are.[5310]
    I have 't. It is engender'd. Hell and night[5312]
    Must bring this monstrous birth to the world's light. [_Exit._[5313]  395

FOOTNOTES:

[4877] ACT I. SCENE I.] Acts and Scenes are marked throughout in Ff,
not in Qq, except at the beginning of Acts II, III, IV and V.

Venice. A street.] Capell. Venice. Rowe. A street in Venice. Theobald.

Enter....] Enter Iago and Roderigo. Qq. Enter Rodorigo and Iago. Ff.

[4878] _Tush,_] Qq. om. Ff.

_much_] Qq F₁. _very_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[4879] _thou_] Ff. _you_ Qq.

_Iago,_] om. Q₂ Q₃.

_hast_] _has_ Q₁.

_had_] _held_ Capell conj.

[4880] _As ... this._] One line in Qq F₁ F₂ F₃. Two lines in F₄.

_this._] _this--_ Hanmer.

[4881] _'Sblood,_] _S'blood_ Q₁. Omitted in the rest.

[4882] _but ... me._] Arranged as by Steevens (1793). Two lines, the
first ending _heare me,_ in Qq. Two, the first ending _dream,_ in F₁ F₂
F₃. Three lines in F₄. Two lines, the first ending _ever,_ in Malone.

[4883] _you will_] Q₁. _you'l_ F₁ F₂. _you'le_ Q₂ Q₃. _you'll_ F₃ F₄.

[4884] _matter, Abhor me._] _matter--_ Capell.

[4885] _Abhor me._] _Abhor me then._ Hanmer, ending lines 4 and 5 as in
text.

[4886] _Thou ... hate._] One line in Qq. Two, the first ending _me,_ in
Ff. Two, the first ending _hold,_ in Hanmer.

[4887] _Despise me_] As in Qq. A separate line in Ff.

[4888] _Despise ... conclusion,_] Hanmer ends the lines _not ...
suit ... him: ... price, ... loving ... with ... stuft ... conclusion._

[4889] _if I do not_] _else_ Seymour conj.

[4890] _Off-capped_] _Off-capt_ Ff. _Oft capt_ Qq. _Off'd cap_ Jennens
conj.

[4891] _I am_] _I'm_ Pope.

_worse_] _worsse_ F₁. _wose_ F₂.

[4892] _own_] om. Hanmer.

_purposes_] _purpose_ Theobald.

[4893] _bombast_] Theobald, _bumbast_ Qq Ff.

[4894] _epithets_] F₃ F₄. _epithites_ The rest.

[4895] _And, in conclusion,_] Q₁. Omitted in Ff Q₂ Q₃. _Clean from the
point; and, in conclusion,_ Seymour conj.

[4896] _And ... arithmetician_] Four lines, ending _mediators; ...
already ... he?... arithmetician,_ in Malone. Three, ending
_mediators ... officer ... arithmetician,_ in Keightley.

[4897] _for_] om. Pope.

_for, 'Certes,'_] See note (I).

[4898] _I ... he_?] As in Pope. One line in Qq Ff.

[4899] _already_] om. Seymour conj., reading _I have ... he?_ as one
line.]

_chose_] Ff Q₂ Q₃. _chosen_ Q₁. _Chosen_ Malone.

[4900] _Cassio, ... wife;_] _Cassio;--("the Florentine's A ...
wife;")--_ Theobald. _Cassio;--(a Florentine's A ... wife;)_ Warburton.
See note (II). _Cassio, a Florentine, (A fellow's almost damnd in a
fair-wife!)_ [Aside. Jennens.

[4901] _damn'd in_] Ff. _dambd in_ Qq. _trimm'd_ as Maginn conj.

_a fair wife_] _a false wife_ Tollet conj. _a frail wife_ Jackson conj.
_a fair-wife_ Staunton conj. _warfare life_ Bullock conj. _other wise_
Cartwright conj. _wife affairs_ Anon. conj.

_wife_] _phyz_ Hanmer. _face_ Capell. _life_ Keightley (Tyrwhitt conj.)
_guise_ Petrie conj. _wise_ Grant White (Becket conj.) _strife_ Anon.
conj. (N. and Q.)

[4902] _spinster;_] _spinster,_ Qq. _spinster._ F₁. _spinster:_ F₂ F₃
F₄.

_unless_] _but_ Pope.

_bookish_] _blockish_ Q₃. om. Steevens conj.

[4903] _toged_] Q₁. _Tongued_ Ff. _tongued_ Q₂ Q₃.

_consuls_] _couns'lors_ Theobald.

[4904] _as he_] om. Steevens conj.

[4905] _Is all_] _In all_ F₃ F₄.

_But he, sir, had_] _he had_ Pope. _But he had_ Seymour conj.

[4906] _Cyprus_] F₂ F₃ F₄. _Cypres_ Qq. _Ciprus_ F₁.

_other_] Qq. _others_ Ff.

[4907] _Christian_] Q₁ F₃ F₄. _Christen'd_ F₁ F₂. _Christn'd_ Q₂ Q₃.

_be be-lee'd_] _be led_ Q₁. _be let_ Warburton. _be lee'd_ Heath conj.

[4908] _debitor_] _debtor_ Hanmer.

_creditor: this counter-castor,_] _creditor. This counter-caster,_ Ff.
_creditor, this counter-caster:_ Qq.

[4909] _I--God bless the mark!--_] _I, God blesse the marke,_ Q₁. _I
(blesse the marke)_ Ff. _I sir (blesse the marke)_ Q₂ Q₃.

_Moorship's_] _Worships_ Q₁.

[4910] _Why_] Ff. _But_ Qq.

_Why ... service,_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_service,_] Qq. _service;_ Ff.

[4911] _letter_] _favour_ Collier MS.

[4912] _And ... old_] Ff. _Not by the olde_ Qq. _Not (as of old)
gradation_ Warburton.

[4913] _Stood ... yourself_] One line in Ff. Two in Qq.

[4914] _Whether_] _If_ Pope.

_affined_] _Affin'd_ F₁ F₃ F₄. _affin'd_ Q₂ Q₃. _assign'd_ Q₁.
_Affirn'd_ F₂.

[4915] _follow'd_] Ff. _followed_ Qq.

[4916] _nought_] _noughe_ Q₁. _naught_ F₁.

_and when he's old,_] _and when old, 's_ Hanmer. _when old,_ Steevens
conj.

_when_] om. Q₃.

_old,_] _old's_ Seymour conj.

_cashier'd_] As a separate line, Anon. conj.

[4917] _Whip ... lords_] As in Ff. Five lines, ending _knaves:_ ...
_formes,_ ... _hearts,_ ... _throwing_ ... _lords,_ in Q₁. Five lines,
ending _knaves:_ ... _are,_ ... _duty,_ ... _themselves,_ ... _lords,_
in Q₂ Q₃.

[4918] _trimm'd ... visages_] _learn'd ... usages_ Collier MS.
_train'd ... usages_ Grant White.

[4919] _Do ... soul,_] Two lines in Rowe. Four lines in Qq Ff.

[4920] _Do well_] _Well_ Pope.]

_them_] Ff. _'em_ Qq.

_they have_] _they've_ Pope.

[4921] _these_] _Those_ Qq.

_these fellows_] _these, now,_ Seymour conj.

_fellows_] _folks_ Pope.

[4922] _a one_] om. Seymour conj., reading _And ... sir,_ as one line.

[4923] _For, sir,_] In a separate line first by Capell. At end of
previous line in Qq Ff. Omitted by Pope.

[4924] _Heaven ... end_:] As in Ff. Three lines, ending _I, ...
so, ... end,_ in Q₁. Two, the first ending _I_, in Q₂ Q₃.

[4925] _doth_] _does_ Q₁.

[4926] _compliment_] Rowe (ed. 2). _complement_ Qq Ff.

[4927] _For ... am._] As in Ff. Two lines in Qq.

_daws_] _Dawes_ Ff Q₂ Q₃. _Doues_ Q₁.

_I am ... I am._] _I'm ... I seem._ Pope. _I'm ... I am._ Johnson.

[4928] _full_] Qq. _fall._ Ff.

_thick-lips_] _Thicks-lips_ F₁.

[4929] _carry't_] _carry 'et_ Q₁. _carry her_ Pope. _carry 'er_ Jennens
conj.

[4930] _father, Rouse him:_] Pointed as by Capell. _father, Rowse him,_
Qq. _father: Rowse him,_ Ff.

[4931] _streets_] _streete_ Q₁. _street_ Q₂ Q₃.

[4932] _And, though_] _An though_ S. Walker conj.

[4933] _changes_] Qq. _chances_ Ff.

_on't_] Ff. _out_ Qq.

[4934] _timorous_] F₂ F₃ F₄. _timerous_ Qq F₁.

[4935] _the fire_] _a fire_ Hanmer.

[4936] _spied_] _spred_ Warburton.

[4937] _Awake!... thieves!_] One line in Ff. Two in Qq.

_thieves!_] Thrice in Qq. Twice in Ff. _ho! thieves, thieves!_ Pope.

[4938] _your daughter_] _you daughter_ Q₁.

_your_] _all_ Pope.

[4939] SCENE II. Pope.

[4940] Brabantio ... Bra.] Theobald. Brabantio at a window. Brab. Qq
(Bra. Q₂ Q₃). Bra. Above. Ff.

[4941] _What ... there?_] As in Qq. In Ff the first line ends at
_terrible._

[4942] _Are ... lock'd?_] _Are all doore lockts?_ Q₁.

_your_] _all_ Pope.

[4943] _'Zounds_] _Zounds_ Q₁. Omitted in the rest.

_you're_] _you are_ Qq. _y'are_ Ff.

[4944] _soul;_] Q₃. _soule;_ Q₁ Q₂. _soule_ or _soul_ Ff.

[4945] _now, now_] F₁ F₂. _now,_ Qq F₃ F₄. _now, ev'n_ Pope.

[4946] _Or ... say._] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

[4947] _say_] _sad_ Q₃.

[4948] _worser_] _worse_ Qq.

[4949] _I have_] _I've_ Pope.

[4950] _daughter is_] _daughter's_ Pope.

[4951] _bravery_] Qq. _knaverie_ F₁. _knavery_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[4952] _quiet._] Ff. _quiet?_ Qq.

[4953] _sir,--_] _sir--_ Rowe. _sir._ Qq Ff.

[4954] _spirit_] Qq. _spirits_ Ff.

_them_] Qq. _their_ Ff.

[4955] _good_] om. Seymour conj.

[4956] _What ... grange._] As in Qq. Two lines, the first ending
_robbing?_ in Ff.

[4957] _What tell'st_] Ff. _What, tell'st_ Qq.

[4958] _'Zounds_] _Zouns_ Q₁. Omitted in the rest.

[4959] _and you_] Ff. _you_ Qq.

[4960] _germans_] _Iermans_ Q₁. _Germaines_ F₁.

[4961] _comes_] Ff. _come_ Qq.

[4962] _now_] Qq. om. Ff.

[4963] _are--a_] Capell. _are a_ Qq Ff.

[4964] _answer;_] _answer,_ Qq. _answere,_ Ff.

[4965] _I beseech_] _beseech_ Seymour conj.

[4966] _If't ... yourself:_] Omitted in Q₁.

[4967] _At_] _Be at_ Hanmer.

_At this odd-even_] _Even at this odd_ Becket conj.

_odd-even_] Hyphened by Malone. _odd steven_ Steevens conj.
(withdrawn). _odd season_ Anon. apud Rann conj. _odd hour_ Cartwright
conj.

[4968] _Transported_] _Be transported_ Mason conj.

_nor_] _or_ F₃ F₄.

[4969] _common_] om. Pope.

_gondolier_] _Gundelier_ Ff Q₂ Q₃.

[4970] _and your_] _and to your_ Q₃.

[4971] _wrongs;_] _wrongs?_ Q₂ Q₃.

[4972] _Tying ... In ... wheeling_] _Laying ... On ... wheedling_
Collier (Collier MS.)

[4973] _In_] _To_ Pope. _On_ Capell.

_wheeling_] _whirling_ Staunton conj.

[4974] _here and_] om. Seymour conj.

[4975] _her_] Qq F₁. _your_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[4976] _thus deluding you_] _this delusion_ Q₁. _this deluding you_
Jennens.

[4977] [Exit above.] Exit Brabantio, from above. Hanmer. Exit. F₁.
Omitted in Qq F₂ F₃ F₄.

[4978] _place_] _pate_ Q₁.

[4979] _produced_] _produc'd_ Qq. _producted_ Ff.

[4980] _However_] _Now ever_ Q₁.

[4981] _Cannot with safety ... he's_] _Can't safely ... he is_ Seymour
conj.

[4982] _Cyprus_] Ff. _Cipres_ Qq. _Cyprus'_ Theobald.

_wars_] _war_ Capell.

[4983] _stand_] Pope. _stands_ Qq Ff.

[4984] _fathom_] _fathome_ Qq. _fadome_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _fadom_ F₄.

_none_] _not_ Q₁.

[4985] _business_] _business on_ Capell.

[4986] _hell-pains_] Hyphenated by Dyce. _hell pains_ Capell. _hells
paines_ Q₁ Q₂. _hells pains_ Q₃. _hell apines_ F₁. _hell_ F₂ F₃ F₄.
_hell's pains_ Rowe.

[4987] _love, Which ... sign. That_] _love, Which ... sign: that_ Rowe
(ed. 1). _love, Which ... signe, that_ Qq. _love, (Which ... signe)
that_ Ff.

[4988] _shall surely find_] _may surely find_ Pope. _may find_ Hanmer.

[4989] _Sagittary_] Q₂ Q₃ F₄. _Sagitar_ Q₁. _Sagitary_ F₁ F₂ F₃.

[4990] SCENE III. Pope.

Enter....] Edd. Enter Barbantio in his night gowne, and servants with
Torches. Qq (Brabantio Q₂ Q₃). Enter Brabantio, with Servants and
Torches. Ff. Enter, below, Brabantio, and Servants, with Lights. Capell.

[4991] _despised_] _despited_ Wharburton.

[4992] _Is_] _I_ Q₃.

_nought_] Qq. _naught_ Ff.

_bitterness. Now_] _bitternesse now_ Qq.

[4993] _say'st_] _saidst_ Theobald (ed. 2).

[4994] _she deceives_] _thou deceivest_ Q₁.

[4995] _more_] Qq. _moe_ Ff.

[4996] _kindred_] _kinred_ F₂ F₃.

[4997] _are_] _are, my lord_ Seymour conj., ending lines 168, 169 at
_heaven!... blood!_

[4998] _O ... blood!_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_got_] _gat_ Rowe (ed. 2).

_the blood_] Qq F₁. _my blood_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[4999] _Is_] Qq F₁. _Are_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[5000] _maidhood_] Ff. _manhood_ Qq.

[5001] _thing?_] Ff. _thing._ Q₁ Q₂. _things?_ Q₃.

_Yes ... indeed._] _I have sir._ Q₁.

[5002] _brother_] _brothers_ F₃ F₄.

_would_] _that_ Q₁.

[5003] _you, lead_] _leade me_ Q₁.

[5004] _night_] Q₁. _might_ Ff Q₂ Q₃.

[5005] _I'll_] _Ile_ Q₁ Q₂. _ile_ Q₃. _I will_ Ff.

[5006] SCENE II.] SCENE IV. Pope.

Another street.] The Street. Rowe. Another Street, before the
Sagittary. Theobald.

... and Attendants] Qq.... Attendants, Ff.

[5007] _stuff o' the conscience_] _stuft of conscience_ Q₁. _tough o'
the conscience_ Jackson conj.

[5008] _lack_] _lake_ F₂ F₃. _take_ F₄. _do lack_ Seymour conj., ending
lines 3-6 at _lack ... service: ... here ... is._

[5009] _Sometimes_] Qq. _Sometime_ Ff.

[5010] _I ... ribs._] As in Ff. Two lines, the first ending _here,_ in
Qq.

_had_] om. Pope.

_to have_] _to 've_ Pope.

_yerk'd_] _ierk'd_ Q₁. _jerk'd_ Q₂ Q₃.

_ribs_] _rib_ F₄.

[5011] _'Tis_] _It's_ Pope.

[5012] _spoke_] _he spoke_ Seymour conj., reading _Nay ... scurvy_ as
one line.

_provoking_] _such provoking_ Seymour conj., reading _and ... honour_
as one line.

[5013] _Against ... have,_] As in Pope. One line in Qq Ff.

[5014] _you_] om. Qq.

[5015] _Be assured_] _Be assur'd_ Ff. _For be sure_ Qq.

[5016] _double_] _capable_ Cartwright conj.

_duke's_] _duke_ Q₃.

[5017] _and_] Qq. _or_ Ff.

_grievance_] _greevances_ Q₃.

[5018] _The_] _That_ Q₁.

[5019] _Will_] Ff. _Weele_ Qq.

[5020] _services_] _service_ Q₃.

[5021] _Which ... know_] Omitted in Q₁.

[5022] _promulgate_] _provulgate_ Q₁.

_my_] om. Pope.

[5023] _siege_] F₃ F₄. _seige_ F₁ F₂. _height_ Q₁ Q₂. _hight_ Q₃.

[5024] _May ... unbonneted_] _Unbonneted may speak_ Becket conj.

_unbonneted_] _unbonnetting_ Pope (ed. 2). _and bonnetted_ Theobald.
_imbonnetted_ Theobald conj. _e'en bonneted_ Hanmer.

_to_] om. Q₂ Q₃.

[5025] _For ... yond?_] As in Ff. Two lines in Qq.

_sea's_] Theobald, _seas_ Qq Ff. _seas'_ Anon. conj.

_lights come_] _light comes_ Johnson.

_yond_] Ff. _yonder_ Qq.

[5026] SCENE V. Pope.

_Those_] Ff. _These_ Qq.

[5027] _parts_] _part_ Hanmer.

[5028] _manifest_] _manifestly_ F₂. _mainefest_ Q₃.

_me rightly_] Q₁ Ff. _my right by_ Q₂ Q₃.

_Is it they?_] _it is they._ Q₁.

[5029] Enter....] Enter Cassio with lights, Officers, and torches. Qq
(after _worth,_ line 28). Enter Cassio, with Torches. Ff (after _yond?_
line 28). Enter, at a Distance, ... Capell (after line 28). Transferred
by Collier.

[5030] _The ... lieutenant._] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_duke,_] Qq. _Dukes?_ Ff.

_lieutenant._] _lieutenant:_ Rowe. _leiutenant,_ Q₁. _lieutenant?_ Ff.
_leiutenant?_ Q₂ Q₃.

[5031] _you,_] _your_ Q₁.

[5032] _news?_] _newes._ Q₁.

[5033] _haste-post-haste_] Steevens (1793). _hast, post hast_ Q₁.
_haste, post-haste_ Ff. _hast, post-hast_ Q₂ Q₃.

[5034] _What is_] Ff. _What's_ Qq.

[5035] _sequent_] _frequent_ Q₁.

[5036] _at one_] _one at_ Q₂ Q₃.

[5037] _consuls_] _couns'lers_ Theobald. _counsel_ Hanmer. _council_
Johnson.

[5038] _have_] _had_ Lettrom conj.

[5039] _hath_] Ff. om. Qq.

_about_] Ff. _aboue_ Q₁ Q₂. _above_ Q₃. _out_ Johnson.

[5040] _I ... you._] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

_I will but spend_] _Ile spend_ Q₁. _I will spend but_ F₃ F₄.

[5041] _And go_] _And then go_ Keightley.

[Exit.] Exit Othello. Rowe. om. Qq Ff.

[5042] _carack_] _carrick_ Q₁. _carract_ F₁. _carriact_ Q₂ Q₃. _carrac_
F₂ F₃ F₄.

[5043] _who?_ Q₁ F₁ F₂. _whom._ Q₂ Q₃. _whom?_ F₃ F₄ Q (1695).

Re-enter Othello.] Capell. Enter Othello. Rowe (after line 53). Omitted
in Qq Ff.

[5044] _Have with you._] Ff. _Ha' with you._ Q₂ Q₃. _Ha, with who?_ Q₁.
_Ha, with you._ Q (1695).

[5045] SCENE VI. Pope.

[5046] Enter....] Enters Brabantio, Roderigo, and others with lights
and weapons. Qq (Enter Q₂ Q₃), after line 52. Enter Brabantio,
Roderigo, with Officers, and Torches. Ff.

_Holla_] Q₁ Ff Q₂. _Ho la_ Q₃.

[5047] [They....] Rowe. om. Qq Ff.

[5048] _Keep ... weapons._] Verse in Qq. Prose in Ff.

[5049] _for_] _or_ S. Walker conj.

_them_] Ff. _em_ Qq.

[5050] _O ... daughter?_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_stow'd_] Ff. _stowed_ Qq.

[5051] _Damn'd_] Ff. _Dambd_ Qq.

[5052] _things_] _thing_ Q₁.

[5053] _If ... bound,_] Omitted in Q₁.

[5054] _wealthy curled_] Ff. _wealthy culled_ Theobald, ed. 2
(Warburton). _wealthiest cull'd_ Hanmer.

_darlings_] Qq. _Deareling_ F₁. _Dearling_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[5055] _to incur_] _to incurre_ Qq. _t'encurre_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _t'incurr_ F₄.

[5056] _guardage_] Ff. _gardage_ Qq.

[5057] _as thou_] om. Seymour conj.

[5058] _Judge ... thee_] Omitted in Q₁.

[5059] _not_] _no_ Q₃.

[5060] _delicate_] om. Seymour conj.

[5061] _weaken motion_] Rowe. _weakens motion_ Ff Q₂ Q₃. _weaken
notion_ Pope, ed. 2 (Theobald). _waken motion_ Hanmer.

[5062] _probable_] Ff. _portable_ Q₂ Q₃.

[5063] _For_] _Such_ Q₁.

[5064] _warrant._] _warrant?_ Q₁.

[5065] _hands_] _hand_ F₄.

[5066] _cue_] _Qu._ Q₁.

[5067] _Where_] Qq. _Whether_ F₁. _Whither_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

_that_] om. Pope.

[5068] _To answer_] _And answer_ Q₁.

[5069] _fit ... session_] One line in Hanmer.

[5070] _if I do_] _if do_ F₁. _if I_ Pope.

[5071] _bring_] Ff. _beare_ Qq.

First Off.] 1. O. Capell. Officer Qq Ff.

_'Tis_] om. Pope.

[5072] _I am_] _I'm_ Pope.

[5073] _night_] _nigh_ F₂.

[5074] _pagans_] _pageants_ Theobald. _paysans_ Becket conj.

[5075] SCENE III.] SCENE VII. Pope.

A council-chamber.] Capell. The Senate House. Rowe.

The ... attending.] Enter Duke and Senators, set at a Table with lights
and Attendants. Qq. Enter Duke, Senators, and Officers. Ff.

[5076] _There is_] _There's_ F₁.

_these_] Q₁ Q₂. _this_ Ff. _his_ Q₃.

[5077] _Indeed_] om. Seymour conj.

_they are_] _they're_ Pope.

_disproportion'd_] Pope. _disproportioned_ Qq Ff.

[5078] _and seven_] _seven_ Grant White conj.

[5079] _And ... forty._] _A hundred and forty, mine._ Seymour conj.

_a_] Q₁ Ff. _an_ Q₂ Q₃.

_and_] Qq F₄ om. F₁ F₂ F₃ and Grant White conj.

_And mine_] _Mine_ Grant White conj.

[5080] _where the aim_] _with the same_ Collier MS.

_the_] Ff. _they_ Qq.

_aim_] _aym'd_ Q₁.

_aim reports_] _aim besorts_ Anon. conj. _main accords_ Anon. conj.

[5081] _do_] om. Pope.

[5082] _in_] Ff. _to_ Qq.

[5083] _article_] _articles_ Q₁.

[5084] Sailor. [Within] Ff. One within. Qq. Sailors [within. Theobald.

[5085] First Off.] Dyce. Officer. Ff Q₂ Q₃. Sailor. Q₁.

_galleys_] _galley_ Q₁.

Enter Sailor.] As in Dyce. After line 12 in Ff. Enter a Messenger. Qq,
after _sense_, line 12. Enter an Officer, bringing in a Sailor. Capell.

_what's_] om. Qq.

[5086] _So ... Angelo._] As in Ff. One line in Q₂ Q₃.

[5087] _By Signior Angelo_] Omitted in Q₁.

[They withdraw. Capell.

[5088] _This ... pageant_] Divided as in Ff. Two lines, the first
ending _reason--_ in Qq.

[5089] _facile_] _fertile_ Pope.

[5090] _For ... profitless._] Omitted in Q₁.

[5091] _But_] Ff. _Who_ Q₂ Q₃.

[5092] _thought_] _nought_ Q₂, as quoted in Steevens's reprint of Q₁.

[5093] _ease ... wake and_] Printed as in Q₂ Q₃ F₃ F₄. _ease, and gaine
To wake, and_ F₁ F₂.

[5094] _Nay,_] _And_ Q₁

_all_] om. Rowe (ed. 2)

[5095] First Off.] Dyce. Officer. Qq Ff.

a Messenger.] Ff. a 2. Messenger. Qq. a Messenger, usher'd. Capell,
after line 31.

[5096] _injointed_] _injoin'd_ Rowe. _injoint_ Seymore conj.

_them_] om. Q₁.

[5097] First Sen. _Ay ... guess?_ Mess.] Omitted in Q₁.

[5098] _thirty_] 30. Q₁.

_re-stem_] Ff. _resterine_ Q₁. _resterne_ Q₂ Q₃. _restrain_ Strutt conj.

[5099] _toward_] Ff. _towards_ Qq.

[5100] _his_] _this_ Capell (corrected in Errata).

_thus_] _this_ Lettsom conj.

[5101] _believe_] _relieve_ Keightley (T. Clark ap. Johnson, and Capell
conj.)

[retiring. Capell

[5102] _Luccicos_] Qq Ff. _Lucchese_ Capell.

_not he_] F₁ F₂ Q₂ Q₃. _not here_ Q₁. _he not_ F₃ F₄. _he not here_
Theobald, ending the previous line _Luccicos_.

_town?_] _towne._ Q₁.

[5103] _Write ... dispatch._] One line in Q₂ Q₃. Two, the first ending
_us_, in Ff. Capell, reading with Q₁, ends the line _him post_.

_to him; post_] _wish him post_, Q₁.

_post-post-haste_] Hyphened by Steevens (1793), reading with Q₁.
_Post-haste_ Pope, ending the line _to him_.

_post-post-haste dispatch_] _post post-haste: dispatch_ Steevens (1773).

[5104] _valiant_] om. F₂ F₃ F₄.

Iago, Roderigo,] Capell. Roderigo, Iago, Cassio, Desdemona, Qq (after
line 46). Cassio, Iago, Rodorigo, Ff.

and Officers.] Qq Ff. and Others. Capell.

[5105] SCENE VIII. Pope.

[5106] [To Brabantio] Theobald. om. Qq Ff.

[5107] _lack'd_] _lack't_ Ff. _lackt_ Q₂ Q₃. _lacke_ Q₁.

[5108] _nor_] Qq. _hor_ F₁. _for_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[5109] _Hath ... bed_] _Rais'd me from bed_ Steevens conj.

_nor doth_] _not doth_ Q₂.

_care_] om. Pope.

[5110] _hold on_] Ff. _any hold of_ Q₁. _hold of_ Q₂ Q₃.

_grief_] _griefes,_ Q₁.

[5111] _and_] _snd_ F₁.

[5112] _And it_] _And yet_ Rowe.

[5113] All.] Qq. Sen. Ff. Duke and Sen. Dyce.

_Ay,_] _I,_ Ff. _I_ Qq. om. Pope.

[5114] _to_] om. Mason conj.

[5115] _Being ... sense,_] Omitted in Q₁.

_not deficient_] _deficient_ Q₃.

_or_] _nor_ Johnson.

[5116] _Sans_] Ff Q₂ Q₃. _Saunce_ Q₁.

_not._] _not--_ Rowe. _not be._ Capell.

[5117] _your_] Ff. _its_ Qq.

_yea,_] om. Q₁.

[5118] All.] Sen. Capell. Duke and Sen. Malone.

_for't_] _for it_ Steevens.

[5119] [To Othello] Theobald. om. Qq Ff.

[5120] _am I_] _I am_ Q₂ Q₃.

[5121] _soft_] Ff. _set_ Qq.

[5122] _now some_] Qq. _now, some_ Ff.

[5123] _feats of broil_] Capell. _feate of broyle,_ Q₁. _feats of
broiles,_ F₁. _feats of broyles,_ F₂. _feates of broyles,_ Q₂ Q₃.
_feats of broyls,_ F₃ F₄.

[5124] _for_] _of_ Q₃.

_gracious_] om. Pope.

[5125] _will_] _would_ Q₂ Q₃.

_unvarnish'd_] _unravish'd_ Q₂ Q₃.

_tale_] _u Tale_ F₁.

[5126] _Of ... charms,_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_drugs, what charms,_] Pointed as in Qq F₁ F₂. _drugs? what charmes?_
F₃ F₄.

[5127] _proceeding_] Ff. _proceedings_ Qq.

_I am_] Ff. _am I_ Qq.

[5128] _daughter._] _daughter with._ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[5129] _bold; Of spirit so_] _bold of spirit, So_ Q₁.

[5130] _herself_] _it self_ Pope.

[5131] _on!_] _on?_ Qq. _on;_ Ff.

[5132] _maim'd_] _main'd_ F₁.

_imperfect_] Qq. _imperfect._ Ff.

[5133] _perfection_] _affection_ Theobald.

_could_] Ff. _would_ Qq.

[5134] _upon_] _on_ Seymore conj.

Duke.] Omitted in F₁.

_vouch_] _youth_ Q₁.

[5135] _certain_] _certaine_ Qq. _wider_ Ff. _witness_ Anon. conj.

_certain and more_] _evidence, and_ Collier MS.

_overt test_] Q₁ Q₂. _over Test_ F₁. _over-Test_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _over test_
Q₃.

[5136] _Than these_] Ff. _These are_ Qq.

[5137] _seeming_] _seemings_ Q₁ Q₂.

_do_] F₃ F₄. _doe_ F₁ F₂. _you_ Qq.

[5138] First Sen.] 1. Sena. Qq. Sen. Ff.

_But,_] om. Hanmer.

[5139] _do_] om. Pope.

[5140] _Sagittary_] _Sagittar_ Q₁.

[to some Attendants. Capell.

[5141] _The ... you,_] Omitted in Q₁.

[5142] _Even fall upon_] _Fall on_ Seymour conj.

[Exit two or three. Q₁. Exeunt two or three. Q₂ Q₃ and Theobald. om.
Ff, Rowe and Pope.

[5143] _Ancient, ... place._] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[Exeunt....] Exeunt Attendants and Iago. Capell. Exit Iago. Rowe, Pope
and Theobald. om. Qq Ff.

[5144] _till_] _tell_ F₁.

_truly_] _faithfull_ Q₁.

[5145] _I ... blood,_] Omitted in Q₁.

[5146] _question'd_] Ff. _questioned_ Qq.

_story_] _storyes_ Q₃.

[5147] _From year to year_] om. Seymour conj., reading _the battles ...
pass'd_ as one line.

_battles_] _battaile_ F₁.

_fortunes_] Qq. _fortune_ Ff.

[5148] _have_] _had_ Collier MS.

_pass'd._] _pass'd. With his demands complying,_ Keightley conj.

[5149] _from_] _to_ Q₃.

[5150] _spake_] Qq. _spoke_ Ff.

[5151] _accidents by_] _accident of_ Q₁.

[5152] _imminent deadly_] Hyphened by Staunton.

[5153] _of_] _and_ Q₁.

[5154] _portance in my_] Ff Q₂. _portence in my_ Q₃. _with it all my_
Q₁. _portents in my_ So quoted by Rymer. _portance in't; my_ Johnson
conj.

_travels'_] Edd. (Globe ed.) _travells_ Qq. _travel's_ Pope.
_Travellours_ F₁. _Travellers_ F₂ F₃. _Traveller's_ F₄. _travellous_ or
_travailous_ Richardson conj.

[5155] _antres_] _antrees_ Q₁. _antars_ The rest. _antrées_ Pope.

_idle_] Qq F₁. _wilde_ F₂ F₃. _wild_ F₄.

[5156] _and_] om. F₁.

_heads_] _head_ F₁.

[5157] _hint_] _hent_ Q₁ and Warburton. _bent_ Jackson conj.

[5158] _such ... shoulders._] Put in the margin by Pope.

[5159] _the_] Q₁. _my_ The rest.

[5160] _other_] Qq F₃ F₄. _others_ F₁ F₂.

[5161] _Anthropophagi_] F₂ F₃ F₄. _Anthropophagie_ Qq. _Anthropophague_
F₁.

[5162] _Do grow_] _Doe grow_ Qq. _Grew_ Ff. _Did grow_ Rowe.

_This_] Q₁. _These things_ Ff. _these_ Q₂ Q₃. _All these_ Pope.

[5163] _thence_] Qq. _hence_ Ff.

[5164] _Which_] _And_ Q₁.

[5165] _parcels_] _parcell_ Q₁.

[5166] _not_] _nought_ Capell conj.

_intentively_] Qq. _instinctiuely_ F₁. _distinctively_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[5167] _distressful_] _distressed_ Q₁.

[5168] _suffer'd_] Ff. _suffered_ Qq.

[5169] _sighs_] _sighes_ Qq. _kisses_ Ff. _thanks_ Southern MS.

[5170] _in faith_] Ff. _I faith_ Qq.

[5171] _thank'd_] Ff. _thanked_ Qq.

[5172] _Upon_] _On_ Pope.

_hint_] Ff. _heate_ Qq.

[5173] _had_] Qq F₁. _have_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[5174] _Here ... it._] One line in Ff. Two in Qq.

and Attendants.] Rowe. Attendants. Ff. and the rest. Qq.

[5175] SCENE IX. Pope.

[5176] _Good ... best:_] Divided as in Pope. One line in Qq Ff.

[5177] _on my head_] Ff. _light on me_ Qq (_lite_ Q₁).

[5178] _this] his_ F₂.

[5179] _most you_] _you most_ Pope. _you must_ Warburton.

_My noble_] _Noble_ Pope.

[5180] _I am_] _I'm_ Pope.

[5181] _you are_] _you're_ Pope.

_the lord of_] _lord of all my_ Q₁.

[5182] _show'd_] _shew'd_ Ff. _shewed_ Qq.

[5183] _much_] _much must_ Q₃.

[5184] _the Moor_] om. Seymour conj.

_God ... done._] Ff. _God bu'y, I ha done:_ Qq.

[5185] _had rather to_] _rather would_ Seymour conj.

[5186] _Which ... heart_] Omitted in Q₁.

_all_] om. Pope.

[5187] _For your_] _And for your_ Hanmer. _For my own_ Lettsom conj.

[5188] _soul I_] _soule. I_ Q₁.

[5189] _them_] Ff. _em_ Qq.

_my_] om. Steevens's reprint of Q₁.

[5190] _Let ... sentence_] One line in Qq. Two, the first ending
_selfe:_ in Ff.

_speake_] _now speak more_ Hanmer, ending lines 199-201 _lay ...
step ... favour_.

_yourself_] _our self_ Warburton.

_sentence,_] _sentence in,_ Hanmer.

[5191] _as_] Qq F₁. _like_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

_grise_] Ff. _greese_ Qq.

_lovers_] Qq. _lovers_. Ff. _lovers here_ Hanmer.

[5192] _Into your favour._] Omitted in Ff.

[5193] _ended_] Ff. _ended,_ Qq. _ended;_ Hanmer.

[5194] _the worst_] _worst_ F₃ F₄.

[5195] _new_] Ff. _more_ Qq.

[5196] _mockery_] _mock'ry_ F₁. _mocker_ Q₃.

[5197] _from the_] _from a_ Q₃.

[5198] _So let_] _So, let_ Theobald.

[5199] _lose_] _loose_ F₁.

[5200] _bears ... But the free comfort_] _cares For the false comforts_
Hanmer.

[5201] _bears_] _heares_ F₃. _hears_ F₄. _heaps_ Hanmer.

[5202] _pierced_] Qq F₂ F₃ F₄. _pierc'd_ F₁. _pieced_ Theobald
(Warburton). _plaster'd_ Bailey conj.

_ear_] _eares_ F₁.

[5203] _I ... proceed to_] F₁ F₂. _Beseech you now, to_ Qq. _I humbly
beseech you to proceed to_ F₃. _Humbly beseech you to proceed to_ F₄.
_Beseech you, now to_ Theobald.

_of state_] Ff. _of the state_ Qq. _o' th' state_ Theobald.

[goes to his Seat. Capell.

[5204] _a_] om. Qq. _most_ om. Johnson.

[5205] _there_] _here_ Q₃.

[5206] _a_] Qq. _a more_ Ff. _a most_ Collier MS.

[5207] _safer_] Qq F₁. _safe_ F₂ F₃ F₄ Q (1695).

[5208] _gloss_] _glosse_ Qq F₁. _grosse_ F₂. _gross_ F₃ F₄.

[5209] _more_] _most_ Rowe.

[5210] _grave_] _great_ Q₁.

[5211] _couch_] Pope. _cooch_ Qq. _coach_ Ff.

[5212] _alacrity_] _alacartie_ F₁.

[5213] _in_] _it_ Steevens (1785).

_hardness_] _harness_ Mason conj. _hardiness_ Anon. conj.

_do_] _would_ Q₁.

[5214] _These ... wars_] Malone. _This ... warres_ Q₁ F₁. _This ...
warre_ Q₂ F₂. _This ... war_ Q₃ F₃ F₄.

[5215] _reference_] F₁ Q₂ F₂ Q₃. _reuerence_ Q₁. _reverence_ F₃ F₄.
_preference_ Johnson conj.

[5216] _With_] _Which_ Q₁.

_accommodation_] _accomodation?_ Q₁.

[5217] _If ... father's._] Divided as by Capell. One line in Qq. _Why
at her Fathers?_ F₁. _Why, at her Fathers._ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[5218] _I'll_] _Ile_ Qq. _I will_ Ff.

[5219] _Nor ... not_] Qq. _Nor would I_ Ff.

_reside_] _recide_ F₁.

[5220] _your prosperous_] Ff. _a gracious_ Qq. _your gracious_ Pope. _a
prosperous_ Seymour conj. _propitious_ Anon. conj.

[5221] _charter_] Qq F₁. _character_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[5222] _To ... simpleness._] _And if my simplenesse._--Q₁.

[5223] _you, Desdemona?_] _you--speake._ Q₁.

[5224] _did_] om. Ff.

[5225] _and ... fortunes_] _and scorne of Fortunes_ Q₁. _to forms, my
fortunes_ Warburton. _and scorn of Fortune_ Johnson conj.

[5226] _heart's_] Ff. _hearts_ Qq.

[5227] _very quality_] _utmost pleasure_ Q₁.

[5228] _dear_] _my dear_ Q₃.

[5229] _rites_] _rights_ Warburton. _parts_ Keightley.

_which_] Qq. _why_ Ff.

[5230] _Let ... voices._] Dyce. _Let ... voice._ Ff. _Your voyces
Lords: beseech you let her will, Have a free way,_ Qq.

[5231] _Vouch ... heaven,_] Omitted in Q₁, ending the lines _will, ...
not._ In Q₂ Q₃ the lines end _will ... way; ... not._

[5232] _with ... affects_] _wi' the young effects of heat_ Collier MS.

[5233] _heat--the ... defunct--_] _heat, (the ... defunct)_ Capell
(Upton conj.) _heate, the affects In my defunct,_ Qq. _heat the
yong affects In my defunct,_ Ff (_effects_ F₂ F₃ F₄). _heat, the
young affects, In my distinct_ Theobald. _heat affects the young,
In my distinct_ Hanmer. _heat, (the young affects,) In my defect_
Upton conj. _heat, the young affects, In my defunct_ Johnson (Upton
conj.) _heat, the young affects, In my defenc'd_ Tollet conj. _heat,
(the young affect's In me defunct)_ Rann. _heat, and young affects,
In my disjunct_, Anon. apud Rann conj. _heat, the young affects,
In my disjunct_ Malone. _heat (the young affects, In me adjunct_)
Becket conj. _heat i' the young affects In my disjunct_ Singer conj.
(withdrawn). _heat of the young affects In my distinct_ Keightley. _th'
heat of young affects In my distinct_ Bailey conj.

[5234] _In ... mind_:] Tyrrwhitt would transpose these lines, reading
as F₁.

[5235] _to_] _of_ Q₁.

[5236] _good souls_] _counsels_ Collier MS.

[5237] _great_] Ff. _good_ Qq.

[5238] _For_] Qq. _When_ Ff.

[5239] _Of_] Ff. _And_ Qq.

_seel_] F₄. _seele_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _foyles_] Qq. _feel_ Rowe (ed. 2). _foil_
Pope.

_dullness_] _dalliance_ Theobald conj. (withdrawn).

[5240] _officed_] _offic'd_ Ff. _active_ Qq.

_instruments_] Qq. _instrument_ Ff.

[5241] _housewives_] _huswives_ Qq.

_skillet_] _skellet_ Qq.

[5242] _estimation_] Ff. _reputation_ Qq.

[5243] _Either_] _Or_ Pope.

_her_] om. Q₁.

_affair cries_] _affaires cry_ Q₁.

[5244] _answer't;_] Edd. _answer it._ Ff. _answer,_ Qq.

_you ... to-night._] Qq. Sen. _You must away to night._ Ff.

[5245] Des. _To-night, my lord?_] Qq. Omitted in Ff. Des. _To-night, my
lord, to-night?_ Pope. Duke. _This night._] Qq. Omitted in Ff. and Pope.

[5246] _nine_] _ten_ Q₁.

[to the Senators, rising. Capell.

[5247] _With_] Qq. _And_ Ff.

_and_] _or_ Q₁.

[5248] _import_] _concerne_ Q₁.

_So_] Ff. om. Qq.

[5249] _good_] om. Q₃.

[5250] [To Brab.] Capell. om. Qq Ff.

[5251] _no delighted_] _no delighting_ Hanmer. _no belighted_
Warburton. _no delight or_ Johnson conj. _so belighted_ Becket conj.

[5252] First Sen.] 1 Sena. Qq. Sen. Ff.

[5253] _if thou hast eyes_] _have a quicke eye_ Q₁.

[5254] _deceived_] _deceiud'd_ Q₂ Q₃.

_and may thee_] _may doe thee_ Q₁.

[Exeunt ...] Exit Duke, with Senators. Theobald. Exeunt. Qq. Exit. Ff.

[5255] _them_] Ff. _her_ Qq.

_in the_] Qq F₁. _in their_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[5256] _worldly_] _wordly_ F₁ F₄.

_matters_] Qq. _matter_ Ff.

[5257] _spend_] Qq F₁. _speake_ F₂. _speak_ F₃ F₄.

_the_] _the the_ F₁.

[Exeunt....] Exit Moore and Desdemona. Qq. Exit. Ff. Exeunt. Manent
Rodorigo and Jago. Pope.

[5258] SCENE X. Pope.

[5259] _will_] _shall_ Seymour conj.

[5260] _If_] Ff. _Well, if_ Qq.

_after._] Ff. _after it,_ Qq.

[5261] _gentleman!_] Rowe. _gentleman?_ Ff. _gentleman._ Q₁ Q₂.
_gentleman,_ Q₃.

[5262] _torment_] Ff. _a torment_ Qq.

[5263] _have we_] Ff. _we have_ Qq.

_prescription to die_] _prescription to dye,_ Ff (_die_ F₃ F₄).
_prescription, to dye_ Qq.

[5264] _O villanous!_] Omitted in Q₁.

_have_] Ff. _ha_ Qq.

[5265] _betwixt_] Ff. _betweene_ Qq.

[5266] _man_] Ff. _a man_ Qq.

[5267] _guinea-hen_] _Ginny Hen_ Qq. _Gynney Hen_ F₁ F₂ F₃.
_Guinney-Hen_ F₄.

[5268] _gardens_] Qq. _our gardens_ Ff.

[5269] _hyssop_] F₄. _Isop_ Qq. _Hisope_ F₁. _Hysope_ F₂. _Hysop_ F₃.

_thyme_] Pope. _Time_ Qq Ff.

[5270] _to have_] Qq F₁. _have_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[5271] _wills_] _will_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[5272] _balance_] _ballance_ Q₁ Q₂. _ballence_ Q₃. _braine_ F₁ F₂.
_brain_ F₃ F₄. _beam_ Theobald.

[5273] _our carnal_] _our carnall_ Qq F₁. _or carnall_ F₂ F₃. _or
carnal_ F₄.

[5274] _our_] Qq. _or_ Ff.

[5275] _sect_] _slip_ Hanmer. _set_ Johnson.

_scion_] Steevens (1793). _scyon_ Hanmer. _syen_ Qq. _seyen_ Ff.
_scien_ Johnson.

[5276] _of the_] _of_ Q₃.

_permission_] _primission_ Q₃.

[5277] _have professed_] _have profest_ Ff. _professe_ Qq.

[5278] _stead_] Hanmer. _steede_ Q₁ Q₂. _steed_ Ff Q₃.

[5279] _thou the_] Ff. _these_ Qq. _thou these_ Rowe.

_defeat_] _disseat_ Warburton.

[5280] _be that ... should long_] Q₁ Q₂. _be long that ... should_ Ff.
_be, the Disdemona should long_ Q₃.

[5281] _to_] Ff. _unto_ Qq.

_Moor--put ... purse--_] _Moore,--put ... purse,--_ Qq. _Moore. Put ...
purse:_ Ff.

_his_] om. Q₁.

[5282] _commencement_] Qq. _commencement in her_ Ff.

[5283] _commencement ... sequestration_] _conjunction ...
sequestration_ or _commencement ... sequel_ Johnson conj.

[5284] _put but_] _but put_ F₃ F₄.

[5285] _locusts_] _locust_ Q₃. _loches_ Warburton. _lohock_ Warburton
conj. apud Theobald MS. _lohocks_ Johnson.

[5286] _shall be to him shortly_] _shall to him shortly bee_ F₂ F₃ F₄.
_shall shortly be_ Pope.

_bitter as_] _acerbe as the_ Q₁.

[5287] _She ... youth:_] Omitted in Qq.

[5288] _error_] Qq. _errors_ Ff.

[5289] _she must ... must:_] Qq. Omitted in Ff.

[5290] _erring_] _arrant_ Hanmer. _errant_ Warburton.

_a_] Qq. om. Ff.

_supersubtle_] _super-supple_ Collier MS.

[5291] _of drowning_] Ff. _a drowning_ Qq.

_thyself_] om. Qq.

_it is_] Ff. _tis_ Qq.

[5292] _if ... issue_] Omitted in Q₁.

[5293] _re-tell_] Ff. _tell_ Qq.

_thee_] _the_ Q₃.

[5294] _hath_] Ff. _has_ Qq.

[5295] _conjunctive_] _communicative_ Q₁.

[5296] _cuckold_] _cuckole_ Q₃.

_me_] _and me_ Q₁.

[5297] Iago. _Go to ... purse;_] Q₂ Q₃. See note (III).

[5298] _hear_] _here_ F₂ F₃.

[5299] [Exit.] Ff. Exit Roderigo. Qq.

[5300] SCENE XI. Pope.

[5301] _would_] _should_ Q₃ and Pope.

_snipe_] Qq. _snpe_ F₁. _swaine_ F₂. _swain_ F₃ F₄.

[5302] _He has_] F₃ F₄. _Ha's_ Qq. _He ha's_ F₂. _She ha's_ F₁.

[5303] _But_] Ff. _Yet_ Qq.

[5304] _his_] F₁. _this_ The rest.

_to plume_] F₁ Q₂ F₂ Q₃. _plume_ F₃ F₄. _to make_ Q₁.

[5305] _In_] Ff. _A_ Qq.

_knavery--_] Qq. _knavery._ Ff.

_Let's_] Ff. _let me_ Qq.

[5306] _ear_] _eare_ Qq. _eares_ Ff.

[5307] _his_] _my_ Q₃.

[5308] _is ... nature_] _a free and open nature too_ Q₁.

[5309] _seem_] _seemes_ Q₁ Q₂. _seems_ Q₃.

[5310] _And ... are._] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

[5311] _led_] _lead_ F₁ F₂.

_nose_] _nose--_ Qq.

[5312] _have't_] Ff. _ha't_ Qq.

_engender'd_] _ingender'd_ Q₁ Q₂. _engendred_ Ff. _ingendr'd_ Q₃.

_night_] _spite_ Warburton.

[5313] [Exit] Qq. om. Ff.




ACT II.


SCENE I. _A sea-port in Cyprus. An open place near the quay._

               _Enter_ MONTANO _and two_ Gentlemen.[5314]

    _Mon._ What from the cape can you discern at sea?

    _First Gent._ Nothing at all: it is a high-wrought flood;[5315]
    I cannot, 'twixt the heaven and the main,[5316]
    Descry a sail.[5317]

    _Mon._ Methinks the wind hath spoke aloud at land;[5317][5318]     5
    A fuller blast ne'er shook our battlements:[5317]
    If it hath ruffian'd so upon the sea,[5317][5319]
    What ribs of oak, when mountains melt on them,[5317][5320]
    Can hold the mortise? What shall we hear of this?[5317][5321]

    _Sec. Gent._ A segregation of the Turkish fleet:[5322]            10
    For do but stand upon the foaming shore,[5323]
    The chidden billow seems to pelt the clouds;[5324]
    The wind-shaked surge, with high and monstrous mane,[5325]
    Seems to cast water on the burning bear,
    And quench the guards of the ever-fixed pole:[5326]               15
    I never did like molestation view
    On the enchafed flood.

    _Mon._                 If that the Turkish fleet[5327]
    Be not enshelter'd and embay'd, they are drown'd;[5328]
    It is impossible to bear it out.

                    _Enter a third_ Gentleman.[5329]

    _Third Gent._ News, lads! our wars are done.[5330][5331][5332]    20
    The desperate tempest hath so bang'd the Turks,[5333]
    That their designment halts: a noble ship of Venice[5334][5335]
    Hath seen a grievous wreck and sufferance[5334][5336]
    On most part of their fleet.[5337]

    _Mon._ How! is this true?

    _Third Gent._         The ship is here put in,[5338][5339][5340]  25
    A Veronesa; Michael Cassio,[5338][5340]
    Lieutenant to the warlike Moor Othello,[5341]
    Is come on shore: the Moor himself at sea,[5342]
    And is in full commission here for Cyprus.

    _Mon._ I am glad on't; 'tis a worthy governor.[5343]              30

    _Third Gent._ But this same Cassio, though he speak of comfort
    Touching the Turkish loss, yet he looks sadly
    And prays the Moor be safe; for they were parted[5344]
    With foul and violent tempest.

    _Mon._                         Pray heavens he be;[5345]
    For I have served him, and the man commands                       35
    Like a full soldier. Let's to the seaside, ho![5346]
    As well to see the vessel that's come in
    As to throw out our eyes for brave Othello,
    Even till we make the main and the aerial blue[5347][5348]
    An indistinct regard.[5347][5349]

    _Third Gent._         Come, let's do so;                          40
    For every minute is expectancy
    Of more arrivance.

                         _Enter_ CASSIO.[5350]

    _Cas._ Thanks, you the valiant of this warlike isle,[5351]
    That so approve the Moor! O, let the heavens[5352]
    Give him defence against the elements,[5353]                      45
    For I have lost him on a dangerous sea.[5354]

    _Mon._ Is he well shipp'd?

    _Cas._ His bark is stoutly timber'd, and his pilot[5355]
    Of very expert and approved allowance;[5356]
    Therefore my hopes, not surfeited to death,[5357][5358]           50
    Stand in bold cure.[5358]

                              [_A cry within_: 'A sail, a sail, a sail!'

                   _Enter a fourth_ Gentleman.[5359]

    _Cas._ What noise?[5360]

    _Fourth Gent._ The town is empty; on the brow o' the sea[5361]
    Stand ranks of people, and they cry 'A sail!'[5362]

    _Cas._ My hopes do shape him for the governor.                    55

                                                    [_Guns heard._[5363]

    _Sec. Gent._ They do discharge their shot of courtesy:[5364]
    Our friends at least.[5365]

    _Cas._                I pray you, sir, go forth,
    And give us truth who 'tis that is arrived.

    _Sec. Gent._ I shall.                                 [_Exit._[5366]

    _Mon._ But, good lieutenant, is your general wived?               60

    _Cas._ Most fortunately: he hath achieved a maid
    That paragons description and wild fame;
    One that excels the quirks of blazoning pens,[5367]
    And in the essential vesture of creation[5368]
    Does tire the ingener.

                      _Re-enter second_ Gentleman.

                           How now! who has put in?[5369]             65

    _Sec. Gent._ 'Tis one Iago, ancient to the general.[5366]

    _Cas._ He has had most favourable and happy speed:[5370]
    Tempests themselves, high seas, and howling winds,[5371]
    The gutter'd rocks, and congregated sands,[5372]
    Traitors ensteep'd to clog the guiltless keel,[5373]              70
    As having sense of beauty, do omit
    Their mortal natures, letting go safely by[5374]
    The divine Desdemona.

    _Mon._                What is she?

    _Cas._ She that I spake of, our great captain's captain,[5375]
    Left in the conduct of the bold Iago;                             75
    Whose footing here anticipates our thoughts
    A se'nnight's speed. Great Jove, Othello guard,[5376]
    And swell his sail with thine own powerful breath,
    That he may bless this bay with his tall ship,
    Make love's quick pants in Desdemona's arms,[5377]                80
    Give renew'd fire to our extincted spirits,[5378]
    And bring all Cyprus comfort.

   _Enter_ DESDEMONA, EMILIA, IAGO, RODERIGO, _and_ Attendants.[5379]

                                  O, behold,
    The riches of the ship is come on shore![5380]
    Ye men of Cyprus, let her have your knees.[5381]
    Hail to thee, lady! and the grace of heaven,[5382]                85
    Before, behind thee, and on every hand,
    Enwheel thee round!

    _Des._              I thank you, valiant Cassio.
    What tidings can you tell me of my lord?[5383]

    _Cas._ He is not yet arrived: nor know I aught[5384]
    But that he's well and will be shortly here.                      90

    _Des._ O, but I fear--How lost you company?[5385]

    _Cas_. The great contention of the sea and skies[5386]
    Parted our fellowship--But, hark! a sail.

                  [_A cry within_: 'A sail, a sail!' _Guns heard._[5387]

    _Sec. Gent._ They give their greeting to the citadel:[5388]
    This likewise is a friend.

    _Cas._            See for the news.     [_Exit Gentleman._[5389]  95
    Good ancient, you are welcome. [_To Emilia_] Welcome, mistress:[5390]
    Let it not gall your patience, good Iago,
    That I extend my manners; 'tis my breeding
    That gives me this bold show of courtesy.      [_Kissing her._[5391]

    _Iago._ Sir, would she give you so much of her lips[5392]        100
    As of her tongue she oft bestows on me,[5393]
    You'ld have enough.[5394]

    _Desd._             Alas, she has no speech.

    _Iago._ In faith, too much;[5395]
    I find it still when I have list to sleep:[5396]
    Marry, before your ladyship, I grant,                            105
    She puts her tongue a little in her heart[5397]
    And chides with thinking.

    _Emil._ You have little cause to say so.[5398]

    _Iago._ Come on, come on; you are pictures out of doors,[5399][5400]
    Bells in your parlours, wild-cats in your kitchens,[5399]        110
    Saints in your injuries, devils being offended,[5399]
    Players in your housewifery, and housewives in your beds.[5399][5401]

    _Des._ O, fie upon thee, slanderer![5402]

    _Iago._ Nay, it is true, or else I am a Turk:
    You rise to play, and go to bed to work.                         115

    _Emil._ You shall not write my praise.

    _Iago._                                No, let me not.

    _Des._ What wouldst thou write of me, if thou shouldst praise me?[5403]

    _Iago._ O gentle lady, do not put me to't;
    For I am nothing if not critical.

    _Des._ Come on, assay--There's one gone to the harbour?[5404]    120

    _Iago._ Ay, madam.

    _Des._ I am not merry; but I do beguile
    The thing I am by seeming otherwise.
    Come, how wouldst thou praise me?

    _Iago._ I am about it; but indeed my invention[5405][5406]       125
    Comes from my pate as birdlime does from frize;[5405][5407]
    It plucks out brains and all: but my Muse labours,[5405][5408]
    And thus she is deliver'd.[5405][5409]
    If she be fair and wise, fairness and wit,[5410]
    The one's for use, the other useth it.[5410][5411]               130

    _Des._ Well praised! How if she be black and witty?[5412]

    _Iago._ If she be black, and thereto have a wit,[5410]
    She'll find a white that shall her blackness fit.[5410][5413]

    _Des._ Worse and worse.

    _Emil._ How if fair and foolish?[5414]                           135

    _Iago._ She never yet was foolish that was fair;[5410][5415]
    For even her folly help'd her to an heir.[5410][5415][5416]

    _Des._ These are old fond paradoxes to make fools laugh[5417][5418]
    i' the alehouse. What miserable praise hast thou for her[5417]
    that's foul and foolish?[5414][5417]                             140

    _Iago._ There's none so foul, and foolish thereunto,[5410]
    But does foul pranks which fair and wise ones do.[5410][5419]

    _Des._ O heavy ignorance! thou praisest the worst best.[5420]
    But what praise couldst thou bestow on a deserving woman
    indeed, one that in the authority of her merit did justly[5421][5422]  145
    put on the vouch of very malice itself?[5421][5423]

    _Iago._ She that was ever fair and never proud,[5410]
    Had tongue at will and yet was never loud,[5410]
    Never lack'd gold and yet went never gay,[5410]
    Fled from her wish and yet said 'Now I may;'[5410]               150
    She that, being anger'd, her revenge being nigh,[5410][5424]
    Bade her wrong stay and her displeasure fly;[5410]
    She that in wisdom never was so frail[5410]
    To change the cod's head for the salmon's tail;[5410]
    She that could think and ne'er disclose her mind,[5410][5425]    155
    See suitors following and not look behind;[5410][5426]
    She was a wight, if ever such wight were,--[5410][5427][5428]

    _Des._ To do what?[5428]

    _Iago._ To suckle fools and chronicle small beer.[5410]

    _Des._ O most lame and impotent conclusion! Do not learn[5429]   160
    of him, Emilia, though he be thy husband. How say you,[5429]
    Cassio? is he not a most profane and liberal counsellor?[5429][5430]

    _Cas._ He speaks home, madam: you may relish him[5431]
    more in the soldier than in the scholar.[5431][5432]

    _Iago._ [_Aside_] He takes her by the palm: ay, well said,[5433]  165
    whisper: with as little a web as this will I ensnare as great[5434]
    a fly as Cassio. Ay, smile upon her, do; I will gyve thee[5435]
    in thine own courtship. You say true; 'tis so, indeed: if[5436]
    such tricks as these strip you out of your lieutenantry, it[5437]
    had been better you had not kissed your three fingers so[5438]   170
    oft, which now again you are most apt to play the sir in.[5439]
    Very good; well kissed! an excellent courtesy! 'tis so,[5440]
    indeed. Yet again your fingers to your lips? would they[5441]
    were clyster-pipes for your sake! [_Trumpet within._] The[5442]
    Moor! I know his trumpet.                                        175

    _Cas._ 'Tis truly so.

    _Des._ Let's meet him and receive him.

    _Cas._ Lo, where he comes!

                _Enter_ OTHELLO _and_ Attendants.[5443]

    _Oth._ O my fair warrior!

    _Des._                    My dear Othello!

    _Oth._ It gives me wonder great as my content                    180
    To see you here before me. O my soul's joy![5444]
    If after every tempest come such calms,[5445]
    May the winds blow till they have waken'd death![5446]
    And let the labouring bark climb hills of seas
    Olympus-high and duck again as low                               185
    As hell's from heaven! If it were now to die,[5447]
    'Twere now to be most happy; for I fear,
    My soul hath her content so absolute
    That not another comfort like to this
    Succeeds in unknown fate.

    _Des._                    The heavens forbid                     190
    But that our loves and comforts should increase,[5448]
    Even as our days do grow!

    _Oth._                    Amen to that, sweet powers![5449]
    I cannot speak enough of this content;
    It stops me here; it is too much of joy:
    And this, and this, the greatest discords be [_Kissing her._[5450]  195
    That e'er our hearts shall make!

    _Iago._            [_Aside_]  O, you are well tuned now![5451][5452]
    But I'll set down the pegs that make this music,[5452][5453]
    As honest as I am.[5452]

    _Oth._             Come, let us to the castle.[5454]
    News, friends; our wars are done, the Turks are drown'd.[5455]
    How does my old acquaintance of this isle?[5456]                 200
    Honey, you shall be well desired in Cyprus;
    I have found great love amongst them. O my sweet,[5457]
    I prattle out of fashion, and I dote
    In mine own comforts. I prithee, good Iago,[5458]
    Go to the bay, and disembark my coffers:[5459]                   205
    Bring thou the master to the citadel;
    He is a good one, and his worthiness
    Does challenge much respect. Come, Desdemona,
    Once more well met at Cyprus.

                             [_Exeunt all but Iago and Roderigo._[5460]

    _Iago._ Do thou meet me presently at the harbour. Come[5461]     210
    hither. If thou be'st valiant--as, they say, base men being[5462][5463]
    in love have then a nobility in their natures more than is[5463]
    native to them--list me. The lieutenant to-night watches[5463][5464]
    on the court of guard. First, I must tell thee this: Desdemona[5465]
    is directly in love with him.                                    215

    _Rod._ With him! why, 'tis not possible.

    _Iago._ Lay thy finger thus, and let thy soul be instructed.[5466]
    Mark me with what violence she first loved the Moor, but[5467]
    for bragging and telling her fantastical lies: and will she[5468]
    love him still for prating? let not thy discreet heart
        think[5468][5469]                                            220
    it. Her eye must be fed; and what delight shall she have[5470]
    to look on the devil? When the blood is made dull with the
    act of sport, there should be, again to inflame it and to give[5471]
    satiety a fresh appetite, loveliness in favour, sympathy in[5472]
    years, manners and beauties; all which the Moor is defective     225
    in: now, for want of these required conveniences, her
    delicate tenderness will find itself abused, begin to heave
    the gorge, disrelish and abhor the Moor; very nature will[5473]
    instruct her in it and compel her to some second choice.[5474]
    Now, sir, this granted--as it is a most pregnant and unforced[5475]  230
    position--who stands so eminently in the degree of this fortune[5476]
    as Cassio does? a knave very voluble; no further conscionable[5477]
    than in putting on the mere form of civil and humane[5478]
    seeming, for the better compassing of his salt and most[5478][5479][5480]
    hidden loose affection? why, none; why, none: a slipper
        and[5479][5481][5482]                                        235
    subtle knave; a finder out of occasions; that has an eye can[5482][5483]
    stamp and counterfeit advantages, though true advantage[5484]
    never present itself: a devilish knave! Besides, the knave[5484][5485]
    is handsome, young, and hath all those requisites in him
    that folly and green minds look after: a pestilent complete[5486]  240
    knave; and the woman hath found him already.[5487]

    _Rod._ I cannot believe that in her; she's full of most[5488]
    blest condition.[5489][5490]

    _Iago._ Blest fig's-end! the wine she drinks is made of[5489][5491]
    grapes: if she had been blest, she would never have loved[5489]  245
    the Moor: blest pudding! Didst thou not see her paddle[5489][5492]
    with the palm of his hand? didst not mark that?[5493]

    _Rod._ Yes, that I did; but that was but courtesy.[5494]

    _Iago._ Lechery, by this hand; an index and obscure prologue[5495]
    to the history of lust and foul thoughts. They met so            250
    near with their lips that their breaths embraced together.
    Villanous thoughts, Roderigo! when these mutualities so[5496]
    marshal the way, hard at hand comes the master and main[5497]
    exercise, the incorporate conclusion: pish! But, sir, be you[5498]
    ruled by me: I have brought you from Venice. Watch               255
    you to-night; for the command, I'll lay't upon you: Cassio[5499]
    knows you not: I'll not be far from you: do you find some
    occasion to anger Cassio, either by speaking too loud or
    tainting his discipline, or from what other course you[5500]
    please, which the time shall more favourably minister.           260

    _Rod._ Well.

    _Iago._ Sir, he is rash and very sudden in choler, and[5501]
    haply may strike at you: provoke him, that he may; for[5502]
    even out of that will I cause these of Cyprus to mutiny;[5503]
    whose qualification shall come into no true taste again but[5504]  265
    by the displanting of Cassio. So shall you have a shorter[5505]
    journey to your desires by the means I shall then have to
    prefer them, and the impediment most profitably removed,[5506]
    without the which there were no expectation of our
    prosperity.[5507]                                                270

    _Rod._ I will do this, if I can bring it to any opportunity.[5508]

    _Iago._ I warrant thee. Meet me by and by at the
    citadel: I must fetch his necessaries ashore. Farewell.

    _Rod._ Adieu.                                         [_Exit._[5509]

    _Iago._ That Cassio loves her, I do well believe it;[5510]       275
    That she loves him, 'tis apt and of great credit:
    The Moor, howbeit that I endure him not,
    Is of a constant, loving, noble nature;[5511]
    And I dare think he'll prove to Desdemona
    A most dear husband. Now, I do love her too,[5512]               280
    Not out of absolute lust, though peradventure
    I stand accountant for as great a sin,
    But partly led to diet my revenge,[5513]
    For that I do suspect the lusty Moor[5514]
    Hath leap'd into my seat: the thought whereof[5515]              285
    Doth like a poisonous mineral gnaw my inwards;
    And nothing can or shall content my soul[5516]
    Till I am even'd with him, wife for wife;[5517]
    Or failing so, yet that I put the Moor
    At least into a jealousy so strong[5518]                         290
    That judgement cannot cure. Which thing to do,
    If this poor trash of Venice, whom I trash[5519]
    For his quick hunting, stand the putting on,
    I'll have our Michael Cassio on the hip,
    Abuse him to the Moor in the rank garb;[5520]                    295
    For I fear Cassio with my night-cap too;[5521]
    Make the Moor thank me, love me and reward me,
    For making him egregiously an ass
    And practising upon his peace and quiet
    Even to madness. 'Tis here, but yet confused:                    300
    Knavery's plain face is never seen till used.               [_Exit._


SCENE II. _A street._

    _Enter a_ Herald _with a proclamation; People following_.[5522]

    _Her._ It is Othello's pleasure, our noble and valiant
    general, that upon certain tidings now arrived, importing
    the mere perdition of the Turkish fleet, every man put[5523]
    himself into triumph; some to dance, some to make bonfires,[5524]
    each man to what sport and revels his addiction leads[5525]        5
    him: for, besides these beneficial news, it is the celebration[5526]
    of his nuptial. So much was his pleasure should be proclaimed.[5527]
    All offices are open, and there is full liberty of[5528]
    feasting from this present hour of five till the bell have[5528][5529]
    told eleven. Heaven bless the isle of Cyprus and our[5530]        10
    noble general Othello!                              [_Exeunt._[5531]


SCENE III. _A hall in the castle._

      _Enter_ OTHELLO, DESDEMONA, CASSIO, _and_ Attendants.[5532]

    _Oth._ Good Michael, look you to the guard to-night:
    Let's teach ourselves that honourable stop,[5533]
    Not to outsport discretion.

    _Cas._ Iago hath direction what to do;[5534]
    But notwithstanding with my personal eye                           5
    Will I look to't.[5535]

    _Oth._            Iago is most honest.
    Michael, good night: to-morrow with your earliest[5536]
    Let me have speech with you. Come, my dear love,[5537]
    The purchase made, the fruits are to ensue;
    That profit's yet to come 'tween me and you.[5538]                10
    Good night.      [_Exeunt Othello, Desdemona, and Attendants._[5539]

                             _Enter_ IAGO.

    _Cas._ Welcome, Iago; we must to the watch.

    _Iago._ Not this hour, lieutenant; 'tis not yet ten o' the[5540]
    clock. Our general cast us thus early for the love of his[5540]
    Desdemona; who let us not therefore blame: he hath not yet[5541]  15
    made wanton the night with her, and she is sport for Jove.

    _Cas._ She's a most exquisite lady.[5542]

    _Iago._ And, I'll warrant her, full of game.

    _Cas._ Indeed she's a most fresh and delicate creature.[5543]

    _Iago._ What an eye she has! methinks it sounds a parley[5544][5545]  20
    to provocation.[5544][5546]

    _Cas._ An inviting eye; and yet methinks right modest.[5547]

    _Iago._ And when she speaks, is it not an alarum to love?[5547][5548]

    _Cas._ She is indeed perfection.

    _Iago._ Well, happiness to their sheets! Come, lieutenant,        25
    I have a stoup of wine; and here without are a brace of[5549]
    Cyprus gallants that would fain have a measure to the[5550]
    health of black Othello.[5551]

    _Cas._ Not to-night, good Iago: I have very poor and
    unhappy brains for drinking: I could well wish courtesy           30
    would invent some other custom of entertainment.

    _Iago._ O, they are our friends; but one cup: I'll drink
    for you.

    _Cas._ I have drunk but one cup to-night, and that was[5552]
    craftily qualified too, and behold what innovation it makes[5553]  35
    here: I am unfortunate in the infirmity and dare not task[5554]
    my weakness with any more.

    _Iago._ What, man! 'tis a night of revels: the gallants
    desire it.

    _Cas._ Where are they?                                            40

    _Iago._ Here at the door; I pray you, call them in.

    _Cas._ I'll do't; but it dislikes me.                       [_Exit._

    _Iago._ If I can fasten but one cup upon him,
    With that which he hath drunk to-night already,
    He'll be as full of quarrel and offence                           45
    As my young mistress' dog. Now my sick fool Roderigo,[5555]
    Whom love hath turn'd almost the wrong side out,[5556]
    To Desdemona hath to-night caroused
    Potations pottle-deep; and he's to watch:
    Three lads of Cyprus, noble swelling spirits,[5557]               50
    That hold their honours in a wary distance,[5558]
    The very elements of this warlike isle,
    Have I to-night fluster'd with flowing cups,
    And they watch too. Now, 'mongst this flock of drunkards,[5559]
    Am I to put our Cassio in some action[5560]                       55
    That may offend the isle. But here they come:[5561]
    If consequence do but approve my dream,[5562]
    My boat sails freely, both with wind and stream.

    _Re-enter_ CASSIO; _with him_ MONTANO _and_ Gentlemen; _Servants
                      following with wine._[5563]

    _Cas._ 'Fore God, they have given me a rouse already.[5564]

    _Mon._ Good faith, a little one; not past a pint, as I am[5565]   60
    a soldier.[5565]

    _Iago._ Some wine, ho!
    [_Sings_] And let me the canakin clink, clink;[5566][5567][5568]
                And let me the canakin clink:[5567][5569]
                  A soldier's a man;[5567][5570]                      65
                  A life's but a span;[5567][5570][5571]
                Why then let a soldier drink.[5567]
    Some wine, boys![5572]

    _Cas._ 'Fore God, an excellent song.[5573]

    _Iago._ I learned it in England, where indeed they are            70
    most potent in potting: your Dane, your German, and
    your swag-bellied Hollander,--Drink, ho!--are nothing to
    your English.[5574]

    _Cas._ Is your Englishman so expert in his drinking?[5575]

    _Iago._ Why, he drinks you with facility your Dane dead           75
    drunk; he sweats not to overthrow your Almain; he gives[5576]
    your Hollander a vomit ere the next pottle can be filled.

    _Cas._ To the health of our general!

    _Mon._ I am for it, lieutenant, and I'll do you justice.[5577]

    _Iago._ O sweet England!                                          80
    [_Sings_] King Stephen was a worthy peer,[5578]
                  His breeches cost him but a crown;[5567]
                He held them sixpence all too dear,[5567][5579]
                  With that he call'd the tailor lown.[5567]

                He was a wight of high renown,[5567]                  85
                   And thou art but of low degree:[5567]
                'Tis pride that pulls the country down;[5567]
                   Then take thine auld cloak about thee.[5567][5580]
    Some wine, ho!

    _Cas._ Why, this is a more exquisite song than the other.[5581]   90

    _Iago._ Will you hear't again?

    _Cas._ No; for I hold him to be unworthy of his place[5582]
    that does those things. Well: God's above all; and[5583]
    there be souls must be saved, and there be souls must[5584][5585]
    not be saved.[5585]                                               95

    _Iago._ It's true, good lieutenant.[5586]

    _Cas._ For mine own part--no offence to the general, nor
    any man of quality--I hope to be saved.

    _Iago._ And so do I too, lieutenant.[5587]

    _Cas._ Ay, but, by your leave, not before me; the lieutenant     100
    is to be saved before the ancient. Let's have no[5588]
    more of this; let's to our affairs. God forgive us our sins![5589]
    Gentlemen, let's look to our business. Do not think, gentlemen,
    I am drunk: this is my ancient: this is my right
    hand, and this is my left. I am not drunk now; I can[5590]       105
    stand well enough, and speak well enough.[5591]

    _All._ Excellent well.[5592]

    _Cas._ Why, very well then; you must not think then[5593]
    that I am drunk.                                      [_Exit._[5594]

    _Mon._ To the platform, masters; come, let's set the watch.[5595]  110

    _Iago._ You see this fellow that is gone before;
    He is a soldier fit to stand by Cæsar[5596]
    And give direction: and do but see his vice;
    'Tis to his virtue a just equinox,[5597]
    The one as long as the other: 'tis pity of him.                  115
    I fear the trust Othello puts him in[5598]
    On some odd time of his infirmity
    Will shake this island.[5599]

    _Mon._                  But is he often thus?

    _Iago._ 'Tis evermore the prologue to his sleep:[5600]
    He'll watch the horologe a double set,[5601]                     120
    If drink rock not his cradle.

    _Mon._                        It were well[5602]
    The general were put in mind of it.[5603]
    Perhaps he sees it not, or his good nature
    Prizes the virtue that appears in Cassio[5604]
    And looks not on his evils: is not this true?                    125

                        _Enter_ RODERIGO.[5605]

    _Iago._ [_Aside to him_] How now, Roderigo![5606]
    I pray you, after the lieutenant; go.        [_Exit Roderigo._[5607]

    _Mon._ And 'tis great pity that the noble Moor
    Should hazard such a place as his own second
    With one of an ingraft infirmity:[5608]                          130
    It were an honest action to say[5609]
    So to the Moor.[5609][5610]

    _Iago._         Not I, for this fair island:
    I do love Cassio well, and would do much
    To cure him of this evil:--But, hark! what noise?

                                          [_A cry within_: 'Help! help!'

            _Re-enter_ CASSIO, _driving in_ RODERIGO.[5611]

    _Cas._ 'Zounds! you rogue! you rascal![5612]                     135

    _Mon._ What's the matter, lieutenant?

    _Cas._ A knave teach me my duty! But I'll beat the[5613][5614]
    knave into a wicker bottle.[5613][5615]

    _Rod._ Beat me![5613][5616]

    _Cas._ Dost thou prate, rogue? [_Striking Roderigo._[5613][5617]  140

    _Mon._ Nay, good lieutenant; I pray you, sir, hold[5613][5618]
    your hand.[5613]

    _Cas._ Let me go, sir, or I'll knock you o'er the mazzard.[5613][5619]

    _Mon._ Come, come, you're drunk.[5613][5620]                     145

    _Cas._ Drunk!                                   [_They fight._[5621]

    _Iago._ [_Aside to Roderigo_] Away, I say; go out, and
              cry a mutiny.                      [_Exit Roderigo._[5622]
    Nay, good lieutenant! God's will, gentlemen![5623]
    Help, ho!--Lieutenant,--sir,--Montano--sir;--[5624]
    Help, masters!--Here's a goodly watch indeed![5625]              150

                                                        [_A bell rings._

    Who's that that rings the bell?--Diablo, ho![5626]
    The town will rise: God's will, lieutenant, hold;[5627]
    You will be shamed for ever.

                  _Re-enter_ OTHELLO _and_ Attendants.

    _Oth._                       What is the matter here?[5628]

    _Mon._ 'Zounds, I bleed still; I am hurt to the death

                                                        [_Faints._[5629]

    _Oth._ Hold, for your lives!                                     155

    _Iago._ Hold, ho! Lieutenant,--sir,--Montano,--gentlemen,--[5630]
    Have you forgot all sense of place and duty?[5631]
    Hold! the general speaks to you; hold, hold, for shame![5632]

    _Oth._ Why, how now, ho! from whence ariseth this?[5633]
    Are we turn'd Turks, and to ourselves do that                    160
    Which heaven hath forbid the Ottomites?[5634]
    For Christian shame, put by this barbarous brawl:
    He that stirs next to carve for his own rage[5635]
    Holds his soul light; he dies upon his motion.
    Silence that dreadful bell! it frights the isle                  165
    From her propriety. What is the matter, masters?[5636]
    Honest Iago, that look'st dead with grieving,[5637]
    Speak, who began this? on thy love, I charge thee.[5638]

    _Iago._ I do not know: friends all but now, even now,[5639]
    In quarter, and in terms like bride and groom                    170
    Devesting them for bed; and then, but now,[5640]
    As if some planet had unwitted men,[5641]
    Swords out, and tilting one at other's breast,[5642]
    In opposition bloody. I cannot speak[5643]
    Any beginning to this peevish odds;                              175
    And would in action glorious I had lost
    Those legs that brought me to a part of it![5644]

    _Oth._ How comes it, Michael, you are thus forgot?[5645]

    _Cas._ I pray you, pardon me; I cannot speak.

    _Oth._ Worthy Montano, you were wont be civil;[5646][5647]       180
    The gravity and stillness of your youth
    The world hath noted, and your name is great
    In mouths of wisest censure: what's the matter,[5648]
    That you unlace your reputation thus,[5649]
    And spend your rich opinion for the name                         185
    Of a night-brawler? give me answer to it.[5650]

    _Mon._ Worthy Othello, I am hurt to danger:
    Your officer, Iago, can inform you--
    While I spare speech, which something now offends me--[5651]
    Of all that I do know: nor know I aught                          190
    By me that's said or done amiss this night;[5652]
    Unless self-charity be sometimes a vice,[5653]
    And to defend ourselves it be a sin
    When violence assails us.

    _Oth._                    Now, by heaven,
    My blood begins my safer guides to rule,                         195
    And passion, having my best judgement collied,[5654]
    Assays to lead the way: if I once stir,[5655]
    Or do but lift this arm, the best of you
    Shall sink in my rebuke. Give me to know
    How this foul rout began, who set it on,                         200
    And he that is approved in this offence,[5656]
    Though he had twinn'd with me, both at a birth,
    Shall lose me. What! in a town of war,[5657]
    Yet wild, the people's hearts brimful of fear,
    To manage private and domestic quarrel,[5658]                    205
    In night, and on the court and guard of safety![5659]
    'Tis monstrous. Iago, who began't?[5660]

    _Mon._ If partially affined, or leagued in office,[5661]
    Thou dost deliver more or less than truth,
    Thou art no soldier.[5662]

    _Iago._              Touch me not so near:                       210
    I had rather have this tongue cut from my mouth[5663]
    Than it should do offence to Michael Cassio;
    Yet, I persuade myself, to speak the truth[5664]
    Shall nothing wrong him. Thus it is, general.[5665]
    Montano and myself being in speech,                              215
    There comes a fellow crying out for help,
    And Cassio following him with determined sword,[5666]
    To execute upon him. Sir, this gentleman
    Steps in to Cassio and entreats his pause:[5667]
    Myself the crying fellow did pursue,                             220
    Lest by his clamour--as it so fell out--
    The town might fall in fright: he, swift of foot,
    Outran my purpose; and I return'd the rather[5668]
    For that I heard the clink and fall of swords,
    And Cassio high in oath; which till to-night[5669]               225
    I ne'er might say before. When I came back--[5670]
    For this was brief--I found them close together,
    At blow and thrust; even as again they were
    When you yourself did part them.
    More of this matter cannot I report:[5671]                       230
    But men are men; the best sometimes forget:
    Though Cassio did some little wrong to him,
    As men in rage strike those that wish them best,[5672]
    Yet surely Cassio, I believe, received
    From him that fled some strange indignity,                       235
    Which patience could not pass.

    _Oth._                         I know, Iago,
    Thy honesty and love doth mince this matter,
    Making it light to Cassio. Cassio, I love thee;
    But never more be officer of mine.

                _Re-enter_ DESDEMONA, _attended_.[5673]

    Look, if my gentle love be not raised up!                        240
    I'll make thee an example.

    _Des._                     What's the matter?[5674]

    _Oth._ All's well now, sweeting; come away to bed.[5675][5676]
    Sir, for your hurts, myself will be your surgeon:[5675]
    Lead him off.             [_To Montano, who is led off._[5675][5677]
    Iago, look with care about the town,                             245
    And silence those whom this vile brawl distracted.[5678]
    Come, Desdemona: 'tis the soldiers' life
    To have their balmy slumbers waked with strife.

                               [_Exeunt all but Iago and Cassio._[5679]

    _Iago._ What, are you hurt, lieutenant?[5680]

    _Cas._ Ay, past all surgery.[5681]                               250

    _Iago._ Marry, heaven forbid![5682]

    _Cas._ Reputation, reputation, reputation! O, I have lost[5683][5684][5685]
    my reputation! I have lost the immortal part of myself,
        and[5683][5685][5686]
    what remains is bestial. My reputation, Iago, my[5683]
    reputation![5683]                                                255

    _Iago._ As I am an honest man, I thought you had received[5687]
    some bodily wound; there is more sense in that than in[5688]
    reputation. Reputation is an idle and most false imposition;
    oft got without merit and lost without deserving: you have
    lost no reputation at all, unless you repute yourself such a     260
    loser. What, man! there are ways to recover the general[5689]
    again: you are but now cast in his mood, a punishment
    more in policy than in malice; even so as one would beat his
    offenceless dog to affright an imperious lion: sue to him[5690]
    again, and he's yours.                                           265

    _Cas._ I will rather sue to be despised than to deceive so
    good a commander with so slight, so drunken, and so indiscreet[5691]
    an officer. Drunk? and speak parrot? and squabble?[5692][5693]
    swagger? swear? and discourse fustian with one's own shadow?[5692]
    O thou invisible spirit of wine, if thou hast no name[5692][5694]  270
    to be known by, let us call thee devil!

    _Iago._ What was he that you followed with your sword?
    What had he done to you?

    _Cas._ I know not.

    _Iago._ Is't possible?                                           275

    _Cas._ I remember a mass of things, but nothing distinctly,
    a quarrel, but nothing wherefore. O God, that men should[5695]
    put an enemy in their mouths to steal away their brains!
    that we should, with joy, pleasance, revel and applause,[5696]
    transform ourselves into beasts!                                 280

    _Iago._ Why, but you are now well enough: how came
    you thus recovered?

    _Cas._ It hath pleased the devil drunkenness to give place
    to the devil wrath: one unperfectness shows me another, to
    make me frankly despise myself.                                  285

    _Iago._ Come, you are too severe a moraler: as the time,
    the place, and the condition of this country stands, I could[5697]
    heartily wish this had not befallen; but since it is as it is,[5698]
    mend it for your own good.

    _Cas._ I will ask him for my place again; he shall tell me       290
    I am a drunkard! Had I as many mouths as Hydra, such
    an answer would stop them all. To be now a sensible man,[5699]
    by and by a fool, and presently a beast! O strange! Every[5700]
    inordinate cup is unblest, and the ingredient is a devil.[5701]

    _Iago._ Come, come, good wine is a good familiar creature,[5702]  295
    if it be well used: exclaim no more against it. And, good
    lieutenant, I think you think I love you.

    _Cas._ I have well approved it, sir. I drunk!

    _Iago._ You or any man living may be drunk at some time,[5703]
    man. I'll tell you what you shall do. Our general's wife[5704]   300
    is now the general. I may say so in this respect, for that
    he hath devoted and given up himself to the contemplation,[5705]
    mark and denotement of her parts and graces: confess[5706]
    yourself freely to her; importune her help to put you in[5707]
    your place again: she is of so free, so kind, so apt, so blessed[5708]  305
    a disposition, she holds it a vice in her goodness not to do[5709]
    more than she is requested: this broken joint between you[5710]
    and her husband entreat her to splinter; and, my fortunes
    against any lay worth naming, this crack of your love shall
    grow stronger than it was before.[5711]                          310

    _Cas._ You advise me well.

    _Iago._ I protest, in the sincerity of love and honest[5712]
    kindness.

    _Cas._ I think it freely; and betimes in the morning I[5713]
    will beseech the virtuous Desdemona to undertake for me:[5713]   315
    I am desperate of my fortunes if they check me here.[5714]

    _Iago._ You are in the right. Good night, lieutenant; I[5715]
    must to the watch.[5715]

    _Cas._ Good night, honest Iago.                       [_Exit._[5716]

    _Iago._ And what's he then that says I play the villain?[5717]   320
    When this advice is free I give and honest,
    Probal to thinking, and indeed the course[5718]
    To win the Moor again? For 'tis most easy[5719]
    The inclining Desdemona to subdue[5720]
    In any honest suit. She's framed as fruitful[5720]               325
    As the free elements. And then for her
    To win the Moor, were't to renounce his baptism,[5721]
    All seals and symbols of redeemed sin,
    His soul is so enfetter'd to her love,
    That she may make, unmake, do what she list,                     330
    Even as her appetite shall play the god
    With his weak function. How am I then a villain[5722]
    To counsel Cassio to this parallel course,[5723]
    Directly to his good? Divinity of hell![5723][5724]
    When devils will the blackest sins put on,[5725]                 335
    They do suggest at first with heavenly shows,
    As I do now: for whiles this honest fool[5726]
    Plies Desdemona to repair his fortunes,[5727]
    And she for him pleads strongly to the Moor,
    I'll pour this pestilence into his ear,                          340
    That she repeals him for her body's lust;[5728]
    And by how much she strives to do him good,
    She shall undo her credit with the Moor.
    So will I turn her virtue into pitch;
    And out of her own goodness make the net                         345
    That shall enmesh them all.

                        _Enter_ RODERIGO.[5729]

                                How now, Roderigo!

    _Rod._ I do follow here in the chase, not like a hound that[5730]
    hunts, but one that fills up the cry. My money is almost
    spent; I have been to-night exceedingly well cudgelled;[5731]
    and I think the issue will be, I shall have so much[5732]        350
    experience for my pains; and so, with no money at all and a[5733]
    little more wit, return again to Venice.[5733]

    _Iago._ How poor are they that have not patience!
    What wound did ever heal but by degrees?
    Thou know'st we work by wit and not by witchcraft,[5734]         355
    And wit depends on dilatory time.
    Does't not go well? Cassio hath beaten thee,[5735]
    And thou by that small hurt hast cashier'd Cassio:[5736]
    Though other things grow fair against the sun,[5737]
    Yet fruits that blossom first will first be ripe:[5738]          360
    Content thyself awhile. By the mass, 'tis morning;[5739]
    Pleasure and action make the hours seem short.[5740]
    Retire thee; go where thou art billeted:
    Away, I say; thou shalt know more hereafter:
    Nay, get thee gone. [_Exit Rod._] Two things are to be done:[5741]  365
    My wife must move for Cassio to her mistress;
    I'll set her on;[5742][5743][5744][5745]
    Myself the while to draw the Moor apart,[5743][5745][5746]
    And bring him jump when he may Cassio find[5747]
    Soliciting his wife: ay, that's the way;                         370
    Dull not device by coldness and delay.                [_Exit._[5748]

FOOTNOTES:

[5314] ACT II. SCENE I.] Actus 2. Scæna 1. Qq. Actus Secundus. Scena
Prima. Ff.

A ... quay.] Edd. (Globe ed.) The capital City of Cyprus. Rowe. The
Capital of Cyprus. A Plat-form. Capell. A Sea-port town in Cyprus. A
Platform. Malone.

Enter....] F₁. Enter Montano and Gentleman. F₂ F₃ F₄. Enter Montanio,
Governor of Cypres, with two other Gentlemen. Qq (Cyprus Q₂ Q₃).

[5315] _high-wrought_] Hyphened by Pope.

[5316] _heaven_] _haven_ Q₁. _heav'ns_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[5317] Seymour, reading _oak so strong, When the huge mountains_,
proposes to end the lines _spoke ... shook ... so ... strong ...
hold ... this?_

[5318] _hath spoke_] Ff. _does speake_ Q₁ Q₂. _doth speake_ Q₃.

_at land_] _at hand_ Q₃.

[5319] _hath_] Ff. _ha_ Qq. _ha'_ Q (1695).

[5320] _mountains melt on them,_] F₃ F₄. _mountaines melt on them,_ F₁
F₂ Q₃. _the huge mountaine meslt,_ Q₁. _mountaine melt on them,_ Q₂.
_the huge mountains melt,_ Pope. _the huge mountain melts,_ Jennens.
_mountains meet on them,_ Jackson conj.

[5321] _mortise_] Theobald (ed. 2). _morties_ Qq Ff. _mortises_ Seymore
conj.

[5322] Sec. Gent.] 2. Gent. Qq. 2. Ff.

[5323] _foaming_] _banning_ Q₁.

[5324] _chidden_] Ff. _chiding_ Qq.

_billow_] _billowes_ Q₂ Q₃.

_seems_] _seem_ Q₃.

[5325] _mane_] Knight. _mayne_ Qq. _maine_ F₁ F₂. _main_ F₃ F₄.

[5326] _ever-fixed_] Ff. _ever fired_ Qq.

[5327] _On the enchafed_] _On 'th' enchaf'd_ Hanmer.

_that the_] _that be the_ F₄. _the_ Seymour conj.

[5328] _embay'd_] Ff. _embayed_ Qq.

_they are_] _they're_ Pope.

[5329] _to_] _they_ Q₁.

Enter a third Gentleman.] Qq. Enter a Gentleman. Ff.

[5330] SCENE II. Pope.

[5331] Third Gent.] 3 Gent. Qq. 3. Ff.

[5332] _lads_] _lords_ Q₁.

_lads! our_] _lords, our_ Pope.

_our_] Ff. _your_ Qq.

[5333] _Turks_] F₃ F₄. _Turkes_ F₁ F₂. _Turke_ Qq.

[5334] _That ... sufferance_] As in Ff. Two lines, the first ending
_seene_, in Q₁. Three, ending _halts: ... Venice, ... sufferance_, in
Q₂ Q₃.

[5335] _a noble_] _Another_ Q₁. _A_ Hanmer.

[5336] _wreck_] Theobald (ed. 2). _wracke_ Qq F₁ F₂. _wrack_ F₃ F₄.

[5337] _their_] _the_ Q₁.

[5338] _The ... Cassio,_] As in Qq. One line in Ff.

[5339] _here_] om. F₄.

[5340] _in, A Veronesa:_] _in, A Veronessa;_ Theobald. _in: A
Veronessa,_ Qq. _in: A Verennessa,_ F₁. _in: A Veronesso,_ F₂ F₃ F₄.
_in; a Veronessa;_ Hanmer. _in, A Veronese;_ Johnson. _in: A Veronesé_,
Collier (Heath conj.) _in: A Florentine,_ Collier MS. _in, The
Veronessa;_ Steevens conj.

[5341] _to_] _of_ F₄.

[5342] _on shore_] Ff. _a shore_ Qq.

_the Moor himself_] _the Moor himself's_ Rowe. _the Moor's himself_
Dyce conj.

[5343] _I ... governor._] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_I am_] _I'm_ Pope.

[5344] _prays_] _praye_ F₁.

[5345] _heavens_] Ff. _heaven_ Qq.

[5346] _Like ... ho!_] One line in Ff. Two in Qq.

_ho_!]om. Pope.

[5347] _Even ... regard._] Omitted in Q₁.]

[5348] _the aerial_] _th' aerial_ Pope. _th' Eriall_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _th'
Ayre all_ Q₂ Q₃. _th' Erial_ F₄.

_blue_] Q₂ Q₃ F₄. _blew_ F₁ F₂ F₃.

[5349] _An_] F₁ Q₂. _And_ F₂ Q₃ F₃ F₄.

[5350] _more arrivance_] Qq. _more Arrivancie_ F₁. _more Arrivancy_ F₂
F₃. _our Arrivancy_ F₄.

[going Capell

Enter Cassio.] Enter Cassio: the others run and salute him. Capell.

[5351] SCENE III. Pope

_Thanks, you the_] Knight. _Thankes you, the_ Ff. _Thankes to the_ Qq.

_this_] Qq. _the_ Ff.

_warlike_] Ff. _worthy_ Q₁. om. Q₂ Q₃.

[5352] _O, let_] _Oh let_ Ff. _and let_ Qq.

[5353] _against_] _from_ F₄.

_the_] Ff. _their_ Qq.

[5354] _a_] _the_ Q₃.

[5355] _pilot_] _Pilot_ F₃ F₄. _Pylot_ F₁ F₂. _Pilate_ Q₁. _Pilote_ Q₂
Q₃.

[5356] _Of very ... and_] _Very expert and of_ Johnson conj.

[5357] _hopes_ F₃ F₄. _hope's_ The rest.

[5358] _hopes, ... cure_] _fears, ... cure or hopes, not forfeited to
death, Stand bold, not sure_ Johnson conj.

[5359] [A cry within:] Within. Ff. Enter a Messenger. Mess. Qq. Enter
another Gentleman. 4. G. Capell.

Enter a fourth Gentleman.] Dyce. Enter another Gentleman. Malone. om.
Qq Ff.

[5360] _noise_] _news_ Capell.

[5361] Fourth Gent.] 4. G. Capell. Gent. Ff. Mess. Qq.

_on_] _one_ Q₃.

[5362] _Stand_] Ff. _otand_ Q₁. _Stands_ Q₂ Q₃.

[5363] _governor_] Ff. _guernement_ Q₁. _gouernement_ Q₂. _government_
Q₃.

[Guns heard.] Capell. A shot. Qq (after _least_, line 57). om. Ff.
Sound of Cannon. Johnson (after _least_, line 57).

[5364] Sec. Gent.] 2. Gen. Qq. Gent. Ff.

_their_] Ff. _the_ Qq.

[5365] _friends_] Ff. _friend_ Qq.

[5366] Sec Gent.] 2. Gent. Qq. Gent. Ff.

[5367] _quirks of_] Omitted in Q₁.

[5368] _the essential_] _terrestrial_ Warburton. _the sensual_ Heath
conj.

[5369] _tire the ingener._] Knight (Steevens conj.) _tyre the
Ingeniuer._ F₁. _tire the Ingeniver._ F₂ F₃ F₄. _beare all
excellency:--_ Q₁. _beare an excellency:--_ Q₂ Q₃. _bear an
excellency--_ Rowe. _bear all excellency--_ Pope. _tire th' ingenious
verse._ Johnson conj. _tire the inventer._ Capell. _tire the ingenuous
virtue._ Steevens conj. _tire the ingene ever._ Malone conj. _tire the
engineer._ or _beat all excellency._ Mason conj. _tire the ingenieur._
Henley conj. _bear all excellence._ Seymour conj. _try the ingenieur._
Becket conj. _tire the Indian ever._ Jackson conj. _tire the imaginer._
Jervis conj.

SCENE IV. Pope.

Re-enter....] Capell. Enter 2. Gentlemen. Qq (after _in?_). Enter
Gentleman. Ff.

_How_] Ff. om. Qq.

[5370] Cas.] Cassio. Ff. om. Qq, continuing the speech to 2. Gent.

_He has_] Qq. _Ha's_ Ff. _Has_ Dyce. _He's_ Grant White.

[5371] _high seas_] _by seas_ Q₁.

[5372] _gutter'd_] Ff. _guttered_ Qq.

[5373] _ensteep'd_] _ensteep'd,_ Ff Q₂ Q₃. _enscerped;_ Q₁. _enur'd_
Pope conj. _enscarf'd_ Steevens conj. _escerped_ Id. conj. _enscarp'd_
Grant White.

_clog_] Qq. _enclogge_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _enclog_ F₄.

[5374] _mortal_] _common_ Qq.

_go safely_] _safe go_ Pope.

[5375] _She ... captain,_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_spake_] _spoke_ Q₁. _speak_ Q (1695).

_great_] om. Q₃.

[5376] _Jove_] _God_ Malone conj.

[5377] _Make ... in_] Ff. _And swiftly come to_ Qq.

[5378] _Give ... spirits,_] One line in Ff. Two in Qq.

_extincted_] _extinctest_ F₃ F₄. _extinguish'd_ Rowe.

[5379] _And ... comfort._] Qq. Omitted in Ff.

_bring_] _give_ Rowe.

Enter ... Attendants.] Malone, after Capell. Enter Desdemona, Iago,
Rodorigo, and Æmilia. Ff. Enter Desdemona, Iago, Emillia, and Roderigo.
Qq (Emilla Q₂ Q₃), after _armes_, line 80.

SCENE V. Pope.

[5380] _on shore_] _ashore_ Q₁.

[5381] _Ye_] Qq. _You_ Ff.

[5382] _thee, lady_] _the lady_ Q (1695).

[5383] _me_] om F₁.

[5384] _yet_] om. F₂ F₃ F₄.

[5385] _O ... company?_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_fear--_] _feare:--_ Qq. _feare:_ Ff.

[5386] _the sea_] _sea_ F₁.

[5387] _fellowship--But_] _fellowship. But_ Ff. _fellowship: but_ Qq.

[A cry within: '_A sail, a sail!_'] Within. _A saile, a saile._ Ff.
After _company?_ line 91, in Qq.

Guns heard.] Sound of Cannons. Johnson. om. Qq Ff.

[5388] _their_] Qq. _this_ Ff.

_the_] _this_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[5389] _See ... news._] _So speakes this voyce:_ Q₁.

[Exit ...] Capell. om. Qq Ff.

[5390] [To Emilia] Rowe. om. Qq Ff.

[5391] [Kissing her.] Kisses her. Johnson. Saluting her. Hanmer. om. Qq
Ff.

[5392] _Sir_,] _For_ Q₁.

[5393] _oft bestows_] F₄. _oft bestowes_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _has bestowed_ Qq.

_on_] Qq F₁. _of_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[5394] _You'ld_] _You'd_ Qq. _You would_ Ff.

[5395] _In faith_,] _I know_ Q₁.

[5396] _it still when_] Ff. _it, I; for when_ Q₁. _it still, for when_
Q₂ Q₃.

_have_] Ff. _ha_ Qq.

_list_] Q₁. _leave_ Ff Q₂ Q₃. _lust_ Collier (Collier MS.) _lief_ Anon.
conj.

[5397] _her heart_] _heart_ Q₃.

[5398] _have_] Ff Q₃. _ha_ Q₁ Q₂.

[5399] _Come ... beds._] Prose in F₁.

[5400] _you are_] _you're_ Pope.

_of doors_] F₄. _of dores_ Q₂ F₂ Q₃. _of doores_ F₃. _of doore_ F₁.
_adores_ Q₁.

[5401] _housewifery_] Q₂ Q₃. _houswifery_ Q₁. _huswiferie_ F₁.
_huswiferie_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

_and_] om. Hanmer.

_housewives_] Q₂ Q₃. _houswives_ Q₁. _huswives_ Ff.

[5402] Des.] om. Q₁. Emil. Jennens.

Em. Anon. MS. See note (IV).

[5403] _What ... me?_] One line in Rowe. Two in Qq. Prose in Ff.

_thou_] Qq. om. Ff.

_me?_] _me._ F₂ F₃.

[5404] _Come ... harbour?_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_Come on, assay--_] _Come, one assay._ Pope.

_assay--_] Qq. _assay._ Ff.

[5405] _I am ... deliver'd._] Arranged as in Qq. Prose in Ff.

[5406] _indeed_] om. Q₃.

_my_] om. Johnson.

[5407] _frize_] Steevens (1773). _freeze_ Qq Ff.

[5408] _brains_] _braine_ Qq.

[5409] _deliver'd_] Q₁ F₁. _delivered_ The rest.

[5410] Printed in italics in Ff Q₂ Q₃.

[5411] _useth_] _using_ Q₁.

[5412] _Well ... witty?_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[5413] _fit_] _hit_ Q₁.

[5414] _foolish?_] _foolish._ F₂ F₃.

[5415] _never yet was ... For_] _ne'er was yet so ... But_ Johnson conj.

[5416] _her to an heir._] _her, to a haire._ Q₁.

[5417] _These ... foolish?_] Prose in Ff. Three lines, ending
_alehouse, ... her, ... foolish?_ in Qq.

[5418] _fond_] Ff. om. Qq.

[5419] _wise ones_] _wise-ones_ F₁ F₂.

[5420] _thou praisest_] Ff. _that praises_ Qq.

[5421] _indeed, ... itself?_] _indeed?... it selfe?_ Qq. _indeed?... it
selfe._ Ff.

[5422] _merit_] Ff. _merrits_ Q₁. _merits_ Q₂ Q₃.

[5423] _put on_] _put down_ Theobald.

[5424] _being anger'd_] _when anger'd_ Pope.

[5425] _ne'er_] _ne're_ Qq F₃ F₄. _nev'r_ F₁ F₂.

[5426] _See ... behind;_] Omitted in Q₁.

_not_] _ne'er_ Johnson.

[5427] _such wight_] Qq. _such wights_ Ff (_wightes_ F₁).

_were,--_] _were._ Q₁. _were)_ Ff Q₃. _were,)_ Q₂.

[5428] _were,--_ Des. _To_] _were, To--_ Des. Seymour conj.

[5429] _O most ... counsellor?_] Prose in Ff. Four irregular lines in
Qq.

[5430] _liberal_] _illiberal_ Hanmer.

_counsellor_] _censurer_ Theobald.

[5431] _He ... scholar._] Prose in Ff. Two lines, the first ending
_him,_ in Qq.

[5432] _the scholar_] _scholler_ F₂.

[they converse apart. Capell.

[5433] [Aside] Rowe. A sid to him selfe. Anon. MS. See note (IV).

_ay, well_] _I, well_ Ff. _I well_ Qq.

_said_] Ff. _sed_ Qq.

[5434] _with as ... will I_] _as ... will_ Q₁.

[5435] _fly_] _flee_ Q₁.

_Ay, smile_] _I, smile_ Q₂ F₂ Q₃ F₃ F₄. _I smile_ Q₁ F₁.

_gyve thee_] F₂. _give thee_ F₁ F₃ F₄. _catch you_ Qq.

[5436] _thine_] Ff. _your_ Qq.

_courtship_] _courtesies_ Q₁.

[5437] _lieutenantry_] _lieutenancy_ Rowe.

[5438] _kissed_] _kiss'd_ Ff. _rist_ Qq.

[5439] _which now again_] _which--now again!--_ Anon. conj.

[5440] _Very_] om. Q₁.

_an_] Q₁. _and_ Ff Q₂ Q₃.

_courtesy_] _courtesie_ Qq. _curtsie_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _curtesie_ F₄.

_so_] om. Q₃.

[5441] _again_] Q₃. _againe,_ Q₁ Ff Q₂. _again--_ Rowe.

_to_] Ff. _at_ Qq.

[5442] [Trumpet within.] Q₂ Q₃ (after line 175). Trumpets within. Q₁
(after line 175). Omitted in Ff.

[5443] _comes_] _come_ F₃ F₄.

SCENE VI. Pope.

[Enter....] Places as in Ff. After line 175 in Qq.

[5444] _To see ... joy!_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_O_] om. Pope.

[5445] _come_] _came_ Q₃.

_calms_] F₄. _calmes_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _calmenesse_ Qq.

[5446] _waken'd_] Ff. _wakned_ Q₃. _wakened_ Q₁ Q₂.

[5447] _from_] _for_ Q₃.

_it_] _I_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[5448] _But ... increase,_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[5449] _do grow_] om. Steevens conj.

_to that_] om. Seymour conj.

_that, sweet powers!_] _that sweete power,_ Q₁. _that sweet prayer!_
Warburton.

[5450] _discords_] Ff. _discord_ Qq.

[Kissing her.] they kisse. Q₁. Kisse. Q₂ Q₃. Omitted in Ff.

[5451] [Aside] Rowe.

_O_] om. Hanmer.

[5452] _O ... am._] Verse as in Qq. Prose in Ff.

[5453] _set_] _let_ Pope.

_make_] _makes_ Q₂ Q₃.

[5454] _let us_] _lees_ Q₃. _let's_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[5455] _News ... drown'd._] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_News_] _Now_ Rowe (ed. 2).

_drown'd_] _dro_ Q₂.

[5456] _does my_] _doe our_ Q₁.

_of this_] _of the_ Q₁. _in this_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[to Montano. Capell.

[5457] _I have_] _I've_ Pope.

[5458] _comforts_] _comfort_ Pope.

_I_] om. Pope.

[5459] _my_] _thy_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[5460] [Exeunt....] Exeunt Oth. Des. Emi. Mon. Gen. and Att. Capell.
Exit. Q₁. Exeunt. Q₂ Q₃. Exit Othello and Desdemona. Ff (Exeunt.... F₄).

[5461] SCENE VII. Manent Jago and Rodorigo. Pope.

_thou_] _you_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

_harbour_] _Habour_ Q₁.

[5462] _hither_] Qq. _thither_ Ff.

[calling him back. Rann.

[5463] _as ... them_] [Aside] _as ... them_ Anon. conj.

[5464] _list me_] _list-me_ F₁ F₂ F₃.

[5465] _of_] om. Rowe (ed. 2).

_must_] Ff. _will_ Qq.

_thee this: Desdemona_] Ff. _thee, this Desdemona_ Q₁. _thee this,
Desdemona_ Q₂ Q₃.

[5466] _finger_] _fingers_ F₄.

[5467] _first_] om. F₂ F₃ F₄.

[5468] _and will she love_] Qq. _To love_ Ff.

[5469] _prating?_] Qq. _prating,_ Ff.

_thy_] Ff. _the_ Qq.

[5470] _it_] _so_ Q₁.

[5471] _be, again_] Hanmer. _be again_ Theobald. _be againe_ Q₁. _be a
game_ Ff Q₂ Q₃.

_to give_] Ff. _give_ Qq.

[5472] _satiety_] Ff. _saciety_ Q₁ Q₂. _satity_ Q₃.

_appetite,_] Theobald. _appetite._ Qq Ff.

_loveliness_] _Love lines_ Q₁.

[5473] _the gorge_] _the, gorge_ F₁.

[5474] _in it_] Ff. _to it_ Qq.

[5475] _a most_] _most_ Q₂ Q₃.

[5476] _eminently_] Qq. _eminent_ Ff.

[5477] _further_] Ff. _farder_ Qq.

[5478] _humane seeming_] _hand-seeming_ Q₁. _human seeming_ Rowe.

[5479] _compassing_] Qq. _compasse_ Ff.

[5480] _most hidden loose_] _hidden_ Q₁. _most hidden-loose_ S. Walker
conj.

[5481] _affection_] Ff. _affections_ Qq.

_why, none; why, none:_] Omitted in Q₁.

[5482] _slipper and subtle_] _slipper, and subtle_ F₁. _slippery, and
subtle_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _subtle slippery_ Qq.

[5483] _a finder out of occasions_] Qq. _a finder of occasion_ Ff. _a
finder of occasions_ Rowe. _a finder of warm occasions_ Johnson.

_has_] _he's_ F₁.

[5484] _counterfeit ... itself:_] _counterfeit the true advantages
never present themselves._ Q₁.

[5485] _a ... knave!_] Omitted in Qq.

[5486] _pestilent complete_] _pestilent-complete_ S. Walker conj.

[5487] _hath_] Ff. _has_ Qq.

[5488] _in her_] _of her_ Pope.

[5489] _blest_] Qq. _bless'd_ Ff. _blessed_ Reed (1803).

[5490] _condition_] _conditions_ Q₃.

[5491] _drinks_] _drinke_ F₂.

[5492] _blest pudding_] _Bless'd pudding_ Ff. Omitted in Qq.

[5493] _didst ... that?_] Omitted in Q₁.

[5494] _that I did_] Ff. Omitted in Qq.

[5495] _obscure_] om. Q₁. _obscene_ Staunton conj.

[5496] _Villanous thoughts,_] Omitted in Q₁.

_Roderigo_] _Rodorigo_ Ff. Omitted in Qq.

_mutualities_] Qq. _mutabilities_ Ff.

[5497] _hard at hand_] Ff. _hand at hand_ Qq.

_comes ... main_] Ff. _comes the maine_ Q₁. _comes Roderigo, the master
and the maine_ Q₂ Q₃.

[5498] _incorporate_] _incorrupt_ Q₃.

_pish!_] om. Qq.

[5499] _for the_] Ff. _for your_ Q₁. _for_ Q₂ Q₃.

[5500] _tainting_] _taunting_ Steevens conj. (withdrawn).

_course_] _cause_ Q₁.

[5501] _he is_] Qq. _he's_ Ff.

[5502] _haply_] Q₁ Q₂. _happely_ F₁. _happily_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _hoply_ Q₃.

_may_] _with his Trunchen may_ Qq.

[5503] _these_] _those_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[5504] _taste_] _trust_ Q₁.

_again_] _again't_ Qq.

[5505] _by the_] _by_ F₃ F₄.

_displanting_] _displaying_ Q₃. _transplanting_ Theobald (ed. 2).

[5506] _impediment_] _impediments_ Rowe (ed. 2).

_profitably_] _profitable_ Q₃.

[5507] _the which_] Ff. _which_ Qq.

_were_] _was_ Pope.

[5508] _if I can_] Qq. _if you can_ Ff. _if can_ Jennens (a misprint).

[5509] [Exit.] om. Q₃.

[5510] SCENE VIII. Manet Jago. Pope.

_believe it_] Qq. _beleev't_ Ff. _believe_ Pope.

[5511] _constant, loving_] _constant-loving_ S. Walker conj.

_loving, noble_] Ff. _noble, loving_ Qq.

[5512] _do_] om. Pope.

[5513] _led_] Ff. _lead_ Qq.

[5514] _lusty_] F₂ F₃ F₄. _lustie_ F₁. _lustfull_ Qq.

[5515] _thought_] _thoughts_ F₄.

[5516] _or_] Ff. _nor_ Qq.

[5517] _even'd_] _even_ Q₁.

_for wife_] _for wift_ F₁.

[5518] _At least_] _At last_ Theobald (ed 2).

[5519] _trash ... I trash_] Steevens (1778). _trash ... I crush_ Q₁.
_Trash ... I trace_ Ff Q₂ Q₃. _brach ... I trace_ Theobald (Warburton
conj.) _brach ... I cherish_ Warburton. _brach ... I trash_ Collier,
ed. 2 (Warton conj.) _brach ... I do cherish_ Heath conj. _rache ...
I'd crush_ Becket conj. _trash ... I leash_ Bailey conj. _trash ... I
train_ Anon. conj.

[5520] _rank_] _ranke_ Qq. _right_ Ff.

[5521] _with_] _wore_ Anon. MS. (pencil). See note (IV).

_night-cap_] _night-cape_ F₁.

[5522] SCENE II.] SCENE IXX. Pope.

A street.] Capell. The Street. Pope.

Enter ... following.] Malone. Enter a Gentleman reading a Proclamation.
Q₁. Enter Othello's Herald with a Proclamation. Ff (Othello's, F₁).
Enter Othello's Herauld, reading a Proclamation. Q₂ Q₃. People moving
in it. Trumpets. Enter a Herald, attended. Capell.

[5523] _every_] Ff. _that every_ Qq.

[5524] _to make_] Ff. _make_ Qq.

[5525] _addiction_] Q₂ Q₃. _addition_ Ff. _minde_ Q₁. _mind's
addiction_ Anon. conj.

[5526] _these_] _this_ Rowe (ed. 2).

_celebration_] _Delebration_ F₃.

[5527] _nuptial_] F₄. _nuptiall_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _nuptialls_ Qq.

[5528] _of feasting_] Omitted in Qq.

[5529] _five_] _nine_ Capell conj.

_have_] Ff. _hath_ Qq.

[5530] _told_] Qq F₁ F₂. _toll'd_ F₃ F₄.

_Heaven_] Qq. om. Ff. _God_ S. Walker conj.

[5531] Exeunt.] Steevens (1793). Shouts, and Exeunt. Capell. Exit. Ff.
om. Qq.

[5532] SCENE III.] Capell. Scene continued in Qq Ff, and Pope. SCENE X.
Hanmer.

A hall ...] The same. Hall of the Castle. Capell. The Castle. Hanmer.

Enter ... Attendants.] Ff. Enter Othello, Cassio, and Desdemona. Qq.

[5533] _that_] _the_ Q₁.

[5534] _direction_] _directed_ Q₁.

[5535] _to't_] Ff. _to it_ Qq.

[5536] _your_] _our_ Malone.

[5537] [To Desd. Johnson.

[5538] _That_] _The_ Q₁.

_profit's_] Ff. _profits_ Qq.

_'tween_] F₃ F₄. _'tweene_ F₁. _tweene_ F₂. _twixt_ Qq.

[5539] _Good night._] Cas. _Good night._ Anon. conj.

[Exeunt ...] Capell. Exit Othello and Desdemona. Qq. Exit. Ff.

[5540] _o' the clock_] _aclock_ Qq.

[5541] _who_] Qq F₁. _whom_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[5542] _She's_] Ff. _She is_ Qq.

[5543] _she's_] _she is_ Qq.

[5544] _What ... provocation._] Prose in Pope. Two lines, the first
ending _has?_ in Qq Ff.

[5545] _has!_] _ha's?_ F₁ F₂. _has?_ The rest.

[5546] _to_] Ff. _of_ Qq.

[5547] _An ... love?_] Two lines in Qq. Four in Ff.

[5548] _is it not ... love?_] Ff. _tis an alarme to love._ Qq.

[5549] _stoup_] _stope_ Qq Ff. _stoop_ Rowe.

[5550] _Cyprus_] _Cyprus'_ Capell.

[5551] _of_] Ff. _of the_ Qq.

[5552] _have_] Ff. _ha_ Qq.

[5553] _too_] _to_ Q₁ Q₂. om. Johnson.

[5554] _unfortunate_] Qq. _infortunate_ Ff.

[5555] _As ... Roderigo,_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_mistress'_] _mistris_ Qq F₁ F₂. _mistris's_ F₃. _mistriss's_ F₄.

_Now, my sick fool_] _My fool_ Seymour conj.

[5556] _hath_] Ff. _has_ Qq.

_out_] Ff. _outward_ Qq.

[5557] _lads_] Qq. _else_ Ff. _elks_ Jackson conj. _elves_ Collier MS.

[5558] _honours_] Ff. _honour,_ Qq.

[5559] _And ... drunkards,_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_they_] Ff. _the_ Qq.

_'mongst_] _amongst_ Q₃.

[5560] _Am I_] F₁ F₂. _I am_ Qq. _And I_ F₃ F₄.

_in some_] _on some_ Capell conj.

[5561] _That ... come:_] One line in Ff. Two in Qq.

[5562] _dream_] _deem_ Theobald. _scheme_ Johnson conj.

[5563] Re-enter ... wine.] Dyce, substantially. Enter Montanio,
Cassio, and others. Qq (opposite line 56). Enter Cassio, Montano, and
Gentlemen. Ff (after line 56). Re-enter Cassio; Montano, and Others
with him. Capell.

[5564] SCENE X. Pope. SCENE XI. Hanmer.

_'Fore_] Ff. _Fore_ Qq.

_God_] Q₁. _heaven_ Ff Q₂ Q₃.

[5565] _Good faith ... soldier._] Prose in Ff. Two lines, the first
ending _pint_, in Qq.

[5566] [Sings] Rowe. om. Qq Ff.

[5567] Printed in italics in Qq Ff.

[5568] _clink, clink_] _clink, clink, clink_ Hanmer.

[5569] _clink_] _clinke, clinke_ Qq.

[5570] _A ... span;_] Two lines in Capell. One in Qq Ff.

[5571] _A life's_] Qq. _Oh, mans life's_ Ff.

[5572] _Some wine_] _Come, wine_ Jennens.

[Wine brought in. Capell.

[5573] _God_] Q₁. _heaven_ Ff Q₂ Q₃.

[5574] _English_] _Englishman_ Collier (Collier MS.)

[drinks, and puts it about. Capell.

[5575] _Englishman_] _Englishmen_ F₁.

_expert_] Q₁. _exquisite_ Ff Q₂ Q₃.

[5576] _sweats_] Q₁ Q₃. _sweates_ F₁ Q. _sweares_ F₂ F₃. _swears_ F₄.

[5577] _I'll_] _I will_ Qq.

[5578] _King ... peer,_] Printed as if not part of the song in Q₁. In
italics in the rest.

_a_] Q₁. _and-a_ Ff. _and a_ Q₂ Q₃.

[5579] _them_] Ff. _'em_ Qq.

_too_] Q₁ F₃ F₄. _to_ The rest.

[5580] _Then_] Qq. _And_ Ff.

_thine_] Qq. _thy_ Ff.

_auld_] Q₂ Q₃. _owd_ Q₁. _awl'd_ Ff. _old_ Pope.

[5581] _Why_] _Fore God_ Q₁.

[5582] _to be_] om. Qq.

[5583] _things. Well:_] Ff. _things: Well,_ Q₁. _things well,_ Q₂ Q₃.

_God's_] Q₁. _heav'ns_ F₁ F₂. _heaven's_ The rest.

[5584] _must be_] Ff. _that must be_ Qq.

[5585] _and ... not be saved._] Omitted in Qq.

[5586] _It's_] _It is_ Qq.

[5587] _too_] om. Qq.

[5588] _have_] Ff. _ha_ Qq.

[5589] _God_] Q₁. om. Ff Q₂ Q₃.

_us_] om. F₃ F₄.

[5590] _and this is_] _and this_ Q₃.

_left_] Ff. _left hand_ Qq.

[5591] _and_] Qq. _and I_ Ff.

[5592] All] Qq. Gent. Ff.

[5593] _Why_] om. Q₁.

_think then_] _think_ Q₁.

[5594] [Exit.] om. Rowe.

[5595] SCENE XI. Manent Jago and Montano. Pope. SCENE XII. Hanmer.

_platform_] F₄. _platforme_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _plotforme_ Q₁ Q₂. _pletforme_ Q₃.

_set_] _see_ Rowe.

[5596] _He is_] _He's_ F₁.

[5597] _virtue_] _virtues_ F₃ F₄.

[5598] _puts_] Ff. _put_ Qq.

_him in_] _in him_ Capell.

[5599] _island_] _isle_ Seymour conj.

[5600] _the_] Qq. _his_ Ff.

[5601] _horologe_] F₁ Q₃. _horolodge_ Q₁ Q₂. _horologue_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[5602] _It were_] Ff. _Twere_ Qq (_T'were_ Q₂ Q₃), reading _Twere ...
of it_ as one line.

[5603] _were_] _wete_ Q₁.

[5604] _Prizes_] Ff. _Praises_ Qq.

_virtue_] _vertues_ Q₁.

[5605] _looks_] _looke_ Q₁.

_is not this_] _is't not_ Seymour conj.

Enter Roderigo.] Roderigo shows himself. Capell.

[5606] [Aside to him] First marked by Capell.

[5607] [Exit Roderigo.] Exit Rod. Qq. om. Ff. [pushing him out. Capell.

[5608] _of an_] om. F₂ F₃ F₄.

[5609] _It ... Moor._] As in Malone. One line in Qq. Two, the first
ending _so_, in Ff.

[5610] _to_] _Unto_ Pope, ending the previous line _so_.

_Moor._] _Moor, Iago._ Anon. conj., dividing as Ff.

_Not I_] Q₁. (Dev.) Ff Q₂ Q₃. _Nor I_ Q₁. (Cap. and Chip.)

[5611] _But_] om. Pope.

[A cry ... _help!_'] Placed as in Theobald. Helpe, helpe, within. Qq,
in italics, opposite line 133. Omitted in Ff.

Re-enter] Pope. Enter Qq Ff.

driving in] Qq. pursuing Ff.

[5612] _'Zounds!_] _Zouns_ Q₁. Omitted in the rest.

[5613] _A ... you're drunk._] Prose in Qq. Nine irregular lines in
Ff. Five lines, ending _duty!... bottle ... lieutenant; ... sir, ...
drunk,_ in Capell, reading as Ff.

[5614] _knave teach_] Ff. _knave, teach_ Qq.

_But_] Qq. om. Ff.

[5615] _wicker bottle_] Qq. _Twiggen-Bottle_ F₁. _Twiggen Bottle_ F₂ F₃
F₄.

[5616] _me!_] _me?_ Qq F₁. _me._ The rest, _me--_ Rowe.

[5617] [Striking Roderigo.] Beats Roderigo. Capell. om. Qq Ff.

[5618] _Nay_] om. Qq.

_lieutenant_] _lieutenant, hold_ Seymour conj., reading as verse.

[Staying him. Rowe.

_I pray you, sir_] _pray sir_ Qq.

[5619] _knock_] _know_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

_o'er_] _on_ Q₃.

[5620] _you're_] Ff. _you are_ Qq.

[5621] [They fight.] Qq. om. Ff. Draws upon Mon. and they fight. Capell.

[5622] [Aside ...] First marked by Capell.

[Exit Roderigo.] Exit Rod. Q₂ Q₃. om. Q₁ Ff.

[5623] _God's will_] _godswill_ Q₁. _God's-will_ Q₂ Q₃. _Alas_ Ff.

[5624] _sir,--Montano,--sir;--_] Capell. _Sir Montanio, sir,_ Q₁. _Sir,
Montanio, sir,_ Q₂ Q₃. _Sir Montano:_ Ff.

[5625] _masters_] _master_ Q₃.

[A bell rings.] Q₂ Q₃. A bell rung: Q₁, opposite line 147. Omitted in
Ff. Bell rings. Rowe, after line 151.

[5626] _that that_] Qq. _that which_ Ff. _that who_ Pope.

[5627] _God's will_] _godswill_ Q₁. _Fie, fie_ Ff Q₂ Q₃.

_hold_] Qq. om. Ff.

[5628] _You will be shamed_] _You will be sham'd_ Qq. _You'le be
asham'd_ F₁. _You'l be sham'd_ F₂. _You'll be asham'd_ F₃ F₄.

[taking him off. Capell.

Re-enter ...] Dyce. Enter ... Ff. Enter Othello, and Gentlemen with
weapons. Qq.

SCENE XII. Pope. SCENE XIII. Hanmer.

_What ... here?_] _What's the matter?_ Seymour conj.

_What is_] Q₁ Ff. _What's_ Q₂ Q₃.

[5629] _'Zounds_] _Zouns_ Q₁. om. Ff Q₂ Q₃.

_hurt to_] _hurt, but not to_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

_death._ [Faints.] _death._ he faints (in italics) Q₂ Q₃. _death. He
dies_ (in roman) F₁. _death:_ Q₁. _death._ F₂ F₃ F₄. _death;--he dies._
[assailing Cassio again. Capell.

[Faints.] After line 158. Anon. conj.

[5630] _Hold, ho!_] _Hold, hold_ Q₁ Q₂. _Holp, hold_ Q₃.

_sir,--Montano,--_] _sir--Montano--_ Rowe. _Sir Montano_ Ff. _sir
Montanio_ Qq.

[5631] _sense of place_] Hanmer. _place of sense_ Qq Ff (_sence_ Qq).

[5632] _Hold!_] om. Pope. _Hold, hold!_ Capell and Grant White. _Hold!
I say,_ Seymour conj., ending lines 155-158 at _sir, ... forgot ...
say, ... shame!_

_hold, hold,_] Qq. _hold_ Ff and Capell. om. Grant White.

[5633] _ariseth_] Ff. _arises_ Qq.

[5634] _hath_] Ff. _has_ Qq.

[5635] _for_] _forth_ Q₁.

[5636] _What is_] Ff. _what's_ Qq.

_masters_] om. Pope.

[5637] _look'st_] Hanmer. _lookes_ Qq F₁ F₂. _looks_ F₃ F₄.

[5638] _this?_] Ff. _this,_ Qq.

[5639] _not_] _not not_ F₂.

[5640] _Devesting_] Qq Ff. _Digesting_ Q (1695). _Divesting_ Rowe (ed.
2).

_for bed_] Ff. _to bed_ Qq.

_then_] om. Q₃.

[5641] _men_] _them_ Collier MS.

[5642] _Swords_] _Sword_ F₃ F₄.

_breast_] Qq (_brest_ Q₃). _breasts_ Ff (_breastes_ F₁).

[5643] _cannot_] _can't_ Pope.

[5644] _Those_] _These_ Q₁.

[5645] _comes ... are_] Ff. _came ... were_ Qq.

[5646] _Montano_] Ff. _Montanio_ Qq.

[5647] _be_] Qq. _to be_ Ff.

[5648] _In mouths_] _In men_ Q₁. _With men_ Seymour conj.

[5649] _unlace_] _unbrace_ Becket conj.

[5650] _to it_] Ff. _to't_ Qq.

[5651] _me_] om. Q₂.

[5652] _By me_] _By me,_ Qq F₁. _By me;_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

_said_] _sed_ Q₁.

[5653] _sometimes_] Ff. _sometime_ Qq.

[5654] _collied_] Ff. _coold_ Qq. _choler'd_ Rowe. _quell'd_ Capell.
_coil'd_ Becket conj. _quelled_ Collier (Collier MS.) _cullied_ Bailey
conj.

[5655] _if I once_] Ff. _Zouns, if I_ Q₁. _If once I_ Q₂ Q₃.

[5656] _this_] _his_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[5657] _Shall_] _Should_ Q₃.

_lose_] Rowe (ed. 2). _loose_ Qq Ff. _loosen_ Capell.

_me_] _me ever_ Lettsom conj.

_What! in_] Capell. _What, in_ Qq. _What in_ Ff. _What, and in_ Hanmer.
_What! here!_ Seymour conj.

[5658] _quarrel,_] _quarrell?_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _quarrels?_ F₄. _quarrels,_
Q₁. _quarrells_ Q₂ Q₃.

[5659] _and guard of_] _of guard and_ Theobald.

[5660] _Iago_] _Say Jago_ Pope.

_began't_] Ff. _began_ Q₁ Q₂. _degan_ Q₃. _began it_ Malone.

[5661] _partially_] Ff. _partiality_ Qq.

_leagued_] _leagu'd_ Pope, _league_ Qq Ff.

[5662] _no_] _mo_ Q₃.

[5663] _I had_] _I'd_ Pope.

_have_] Ff. _ha_ Q₁ _ha'_ Q₂ Q₃.

_cut from my_] Ff. _out from my_ Q₁. _out of my_ Q₂. _out of his_ Q₃.

[5664] _the truth_] _so the truth_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[5665] _him_] om. Long MS.

_Thus_] Qq. _This_ Ff.

_it is_] _'tis_ Pope.

[5666] _him_] om. Pope.

[5667] _in to_] _into_ Q₂ F₂ Q₃.

[5668] _and_] om. Pope.

_the_] _then_ F₁.

[5669] _oath_] _oaths_ Q₁.

[5670] _say_] _see_ Q₁.

[5671] _cannot I_] Ff. _can I not_ Qq.

[5672] _those_] _them_ Q₃.

[5673] Re-enter....] Dyce. Enter ... Ff. Enter Desdemona, with others.
Q₁. After line 240 in Q₂ Q₃.

[5674] _What's_] Q₂ Q₃. What is Q₁ Ff.

_matter?_] Qq. _matter (Deere?)_ F₁ F₂. _matter (Dear?)_ F₃ F₄.

[5675] _All's ... off_] Arranged as by Pope. Three lines, ending
_sweeting: ... hurts_, _... off,_ in Qq Ff.

[5676] _All's_] _All is_ Pope.

_well now, sweeting_] _well now sweeting_ Qq. _well, Sweeting_ Ff.
_well. Here, sweeting_ Johnson.

_come away_] _Come, away_ Rowe. _Come, let's away_ Capell, arranging as
Qq Ff.

[5677] _Lead him off._] A stage direction. Malone conj.

[To Montano....] Steevens (1778). To Montano. Johnson. Exeunt some with
Montano. Capell. om. Qq Ff.

[5678] _vile_] _vild_ F₁.

_brawl_] _brawl's_ Anon. conj.

[5679] [Exeunt....] Exit Moore, Desdemona, and attendants. Qq (after
line 249). Exit. Ff.

[5680] SCENE XIII. Pope. SCENE XIV. Hanmer.

[5681] _Ay,_] om. Pope.

[5682] _Marry, heaven_] _Mary God_ Q₁.

[5683] _Reputation ... reputation!_] Prose in Ff. Four lines in Qq.

[5684] _Reputation_] Thrice in Ff. Twice in Qq.

_O_] om. Q₁.

_O, I have_] _ho I_ Q (1695).

[5685] _have ... have_] Ff. _ha ... ha_ Qq.

[5686] _part of_] Ff. _part sir of_ Qq.

_myself_] _my salfe_ Q₃.

[5687] _thought_] Qq. _had thought_ Ff.

[5688] _sense_] _sence_ Ff. _offence_ Qq. _of sense_ Anon. conj.

[5689] _are_] Qq. _are more_ Ff.

[5690] _affright_] _appease_ Staunton conj.

_imperious_] _impious_ Hanmer (ed. 2).

[5691] _slight_] Ff. _light_ Qq.

_and so_] Ff. _and_ Qq.

[5692] _Drunk ... shadow?_] Omitted in Q₁.

[5693] _speak parrot?_] _speake parrat?_ F₁ Q₂ F₂ Q₃. _speak parrat?_
F₃. _speak, parrot?_ F₄. _speak? parrot,_ Theobald. _speak? parrot?_
Hanmer.

[5694] _if thou_] _thou_ Q₃.

[5695] _nothing_] _not the_ Anon. conj.

_O God_] Q₁. _O_ Q₂ Q₃. _Oh_ Ff.

[5696] _pleasance, revel_] _revell, pleasure_ Qq.

[5697] _and_] om. Qq.

[5698] _not_] _not so_ Q₁ Q₂.

[5699] _them_] Ff. _em_ Qq.

[5700] _fool_] _foule_ Q₃.

_O strange!_] om. Qq.

[5701] _inordinate_] _unordinate_ Q₁.

_ingredient_] Ff. _ingredience_ Qq.

[5702] _familiar_] _famillar_ F₁.

[5703] _some time_] Qq. _a time_ Ff. _one time_ Grant White conj.

[5704] _man_] om. Q₁.

_I'll_] _I'le_ Q₁. _Ile_ Q₂ Q₃. _I_ Ff.

[5705] _hath_] Ff. _has_ Qq.

[5706] _mark_] Q₃. _marke._ Q₁ Q₂. _marke:_ Ff (_mark:_ F₄).

_denotement_] Theobald. _deuotement_ Q₁ F₁ Q₂. _devotement_ F₂ Q₃ F₃ F₄.

[5707] _her help_] _her, shee'll helpe to_ Qq.

[5708] _of so free_] _so free_ Qq.

[5709] _she_] Ff. _that she_ Qq.

[5710] _broken joint_] _braule_ Q₁.

[5711] _stronger_] _stonger_ F₁ F₂.

_it was_] Ff. _twas_ Q₁. _t'was_ Q₂ Q₃.

[5712] _honest_] om. Q₃.

[5713] _I will_] Ff. _will I_ Qq.

[5714] _here_] om. Ff.

[5715] _You ... watch._] Prose in Ff. Two lines, the first ending
_right,_ in Qq.

[5716] [Exit.] Qq. Exit Cassio. Ff.

[5717] SCENE XIV. Pope. SCENE XV. Hanmer.

_And ... villain?_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[5718] _Probal_] _Probable_ Rowe. _Likely_ Pope.

[5719] _To win ... easy_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[5720] _subdue ... suit. She's_] Pointed as in Ff. _subdue, In ...
suite, she's_ Q₁. _subdue, In ... suite she's_ Q₂ Q₃. _subdue; In ...
suit she's_ Q (1695).

[5721] _were't_] Q₃. _wer't_ Q₁ Q₂. _were_ Ff.

[5722] _How am_] _Am_ Pope.

[5723] _course, Directly_] _course Directly_ S. Walker conj.

[5724] _Divinity of hell!_] _'Tis hell's divinity:_ Pope.

_hell!_] _hell,_ Qq Ff.

[5725] _the_] F₁ F₂ F₃. _their_ Qq F₄.

[5726] _whiles_] Ff. _while_ Q₁. _whilst_ Q₂ Q₃.

[5727] _fortunes_] Qq. _fortune_ Ff.

[5728] _for_] _from_ Johnson.

[5729] _That ... Roderigo!_] One line in Pope. Two in Qq. Ff.

_enmesh_] Q₁ Q₂. _en-mash_ F₁ F₂. _enmash_ F₃ F₄. _enemesh_ Q₃.

_them_] _em_ Q₁.

Enter....] Qq. Enter Rodorigo. Ff (after _Roderigo!_).

[5730] SCENE XV. Pope. SCENE XVI. Hanmer.

_do_] om. Pope.

[5731] _have_] Ff. _ha_ Qq.

[5732] _and_] om. Qq.

[5733] _pains ... Venice._] _paines, as that comes to, and no money at
all, and with that wit returne to Venice._ Q₁. _paines, and no mony at
all, and a little more wit returne to Venice._ Q₂ Q₃ (_and with a_ Q₃).

[5734] _know'st_] Ff. _knowest_ Qq.

[5735] _Does't_] _Do'st_ Q₁. _Dos't_ F₁ Q₂ F₂ Q₃. _Dost_ F₃ F₄.

_hath_] Ff. _has_ Qq.

[5736] _hast_] _hath_ F₁ Q (1695).

[5737] _grow_] _grew_ Q₃.

[5738] _Yet_] _But_ Q₁.

_will ... ripe_] _will fire be ripe_ Q₃. _are not first ripe_ Hanmer.

[5739] _By the mass_] _Introth_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _In troth_ F₄.

[5740] _hours_] _time_ Jennens.

[5741] _Nay ... done:_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[Exit Rod.] Exit Rodorigo. Ff. om. Qq.

_Two_] Ff. _Some_ Qq.

[5742] _I'll ... on;_] om. Seymour conj.

[5743] _I'll ... apart,_] Divided as in Qq. One line in Ff.

[5744] _on;_] _on:--_ Theobald. _on._ Qq. _on_ Ff.

[5745] _on ... draw_] _on to draw_ Pope. _on; so draw_ Theobald.

[5746] _the while_] Theobald. _awhile_ Q₁. _a while_ Ff Q₂ Q₃.

_to draw_] _will draw_ Johnson.

[5747] _when_] _where_ Collier MS.

[5748] _device_] Ff. _devise_ Qq.

[Exit.] Ff. Exeunt. Qq.




ACT III.


SCENE I. _Before the castle._

               _Enter_ CASSIO _and some_ Musicians.[5749]

    _Cas._ Masters, play here; I will content your pains;[5750]
    Something that's brief; and bid 'Good morrow, general.'    [_Music._

                          _Enter_ Clown.[5751]

    _Clo._ Why, masters, have your instruments been in[5752]
    Naples, that they speak i' the nose thus?[5753]

    _First Mus._ How, sir, how![5754]                                  5

    _Clo._ Are these, I pray you, wind-instruments?[5755]

    _First Mus._ Ay, marry, are they, sir.[5754]

    _Clo._ O, thereby hangs a tail.[5756]

    _First Mus._ Whereby hangs a tale, sir?[5757]

    _Clo._ Marry, sir, by many a wind-instrument that I know.         10
    But, masters, here's money for you: and the general so[5758]
    likes your music, that he desires you, for love's sake, to[5759]
    make no more noise with it.[5760]

    _First Mus._ Well, sir, we will not.

    _Clo._ If you have any music that may not be heard,               15
    to 't again: but, as they say, to hear music the general
    does not greatly care.

    _First Mus._ We have none such, sir.[5761]

    _Clo._ Then put up your pipes in your bag, for I'll away:[5762]
    go; vanish into air; away!            [_Exeunt Musicians._[5763]  20

    _Cas._ Dost thou hear, my honest friend?[5764]

    _Clo._ No, I hear not your honest friend; I hear you.[5765]

    _Cas._ Prithee, keep up thy quillets.  There's a poor
    piece of gold for thee: if the gentlewoman that attends the
    general's wife be stirring, tell her there's one Cassio entreats[5766]  25
    her a little favour of speech: wilt thou do this?[5767]

    _Clo._ She is stirring, sir: if she will stir hither, I shall
    seem to notify unto her.[5768]

    _Cas._ Do, good my friend.                      [_Exit Clown._[5769]

                          _Enter_ Iago.[5770]

                          In happy time, Iago.

    _Iago._ You have not been a-bed, then?[5771][5772]                30

    _Cas._ Why, no; the day had broke[5773]
    Before we parted. I have made bold, Iago,[5772][5773][5774]
    To send in to your wife: my suit to her[5773][5775]
    Is, that she will to virtuous Desdemona[5773][5776]
    Procure me some access.

    _Iago._                 I'll send her to you presently;[5777]     35
    And I'll devise a mean to draw the Moor
    Out of the way, that your converse and business
    May be more free.

    _Cas._ I humbly thank you for't. [_Exit Iago._] I never
                knew[5778][5779]
    A Florentine more kind and honest.[5779][5780]                    40

                            _Enter_ EMILIA.

    _Emil._ Good morrow, good lieutenant: I am sorry
    For your displeasure; but all will sure be well.[5781]
    The general and his wife are talking of it,
    And she speaks for you stoutly: the Moor replies,
    That he you hurt is of great fame in Cyprus                       45
    And great affinity, and that in wholesome wisdom[5782]
    He might not but refuse you; but he protests he loves you,[5783]
    And needs no other suitor but his likings[5784]
    To take the safest occasion by the front[5785]
    To bring you in again.

    _Cas._                 Yet, I beseech you,                        50
    If you think fit, or that it may be done,
    Give me advantage of some brief discourse
    With Desdemona alone.

    _Emil._               Pray you, come in:[5786]
    I will bestow you where you shall have time
    To speak your bosom freely.

    _Cas._             I am much bound to you.      [_Exeunt._[5787]  55


SCENE II. _A room in the castle._[5788]

                _Enter_ OTHELLO, IAGO, _and_ Gentlemen.

    _Oth._ These letters give, Iago, to the pilot;
    And by him do my duties to the senate:[5789]
    That done, I will be walking on the works;[5790]
    Repair there to me.

    _Iago._             Well, my good lord, I'll do't.[5791]

    _Oth._ This fortification, gentlemen, shall we see't?              5

    _Gent._ We'll wait upon your lordship.              [_Exeunt._[5792]


SCENE III. _The garden of the castle._[5793]

                _Enter_ DESDEMONA, CASSIO, _and_ EMILIA.

    _Des._ Be thou assured, good Cassio, I will do
    All my abilities in thy behalf.

    _Emil._ Good madam, do: I warrant it grieves my husband[5794]
    As if the case were his.[5795]

    _Des._ O, that's an honest fellow. Do not doubt, Cassio,[5796]     5
    But I will have my lord and you again
    As friendly as you were.

    _Cas._                   Bounteous madam,[5797]
    Whatever shall become of Michael Cassio,
    He's never any thing but your true servant.

    _Des._ I know't: I thank you. You do love my lord:[5798]          10
    You have known him long; and be you well assured[5799]
    He shall in strangeness stand no farther off[5800]
    Than in a politic distance.

    _Cas._                      Ay, but, lady,
    That policy may either last so long,[5801]
    Or feed upon such nice and waterish diet,                         15
    Or breed itself so out of circumstance,[5802]
    That, I being absent and my place supplied,
    My general will forget my love and service.[5803]

    _Des._ Do not doubt that; before Emilia here
    I give thee warrant of thy place: assure thee,[5804]              20
    If I do vow a friendship, I'll perform it
    To the last article: my lord shall never rest;[5805]
    I'll watch him tame and talk him out of patience;
    His bed shall seem a school, his board a shrift;
    I'll intermingle every thing he does                              25
    With Cassio's suit: therefore be merry, Cassio;
    For thy solicitor shall rather die
    Than give thy cause away.[5806]

           _Enter_ OTHELLO _and_ IAGO, _at a distance_.[5807]

    _Emil._ Madam, here comes my lord.

    _Cas._ Madam, I'll take my leave.                                 30

    _Des._ Nay, stay and hear me speak.[5808]

    _Cas._ Madam, not now: I am very ill at ease,[5809]
    Unfit for mine own purposes.[5810]

    _Des._ Well, do your discretion.               [_Exit Cassio._[5811]

    _Iago._ Ha! I like not that.                                      35

    _Oth._ What dost thou say?

    _Iago._ Nothing, my lord: or if--I know not what.[5812]

    _Oth._ Was not that Cassio parted from my wife?

    _Iago._ Cassio, my lord! No, sure, I cannot think it,[5813]
    That he would steal away so guilty-like,[5814]                    40
    Seeing you coming.

    _Oth._             I do believe 'twas he.[5815][5816]

    _Des._ How now, my lord![5816][5817]
    I have been talking with a suitor here,
    A man that languishes in your displeasure.

    _Oth._ Who is't you mean?                                         45

    _Des._ Why, your lieutenant, Cassio. Good my lord,[5818]
    If I have any grace or power to move you,
    His present reconciliation take;[5819]
    For if he be not one that truly loves you,
    That errs in ignorance and not in cunning,                        50
    I have no judgement in an honest face:
    I prithee, call him back.

    _Oth._                    Went he hence now?[5820]

    _Des._ Ay, sooth; so humbled,[5820][5821]
    That he hath left part of his grief with me,[5822]
    To suffer with him. Good love, call him back.[5823]               55

    _Oth._ Not now, sweet Desdemona; some other time.[5824]

    _Des._ But shall't be shortly?

    _Oth._                         The sooner, sweet, for you.[5825]

    _Des._ Shall't be to-night at supper?

    _Oth._                                No, not to-night.[5826]

    _Des._ To-morrow dinner then?

    _Oth._                        I shall not dine at home;
    I meet the captains at the citadel.                               60

    _Des._ Why then to-morrow night; or Tuesday morn;[5827]
    On Tuesday noon, or night; on Wednesday morn:[5828]
    I prithee, name the time; but let it not[5829]
    Exceed three days: in faith, he's penitent;[5830]
    And yet his trespass, in our common reason--                      65
    Save that, they say, the wars must make examples[5831]
    Out of their best--is not almost a fault[5832]
    To incur a private check. When shall he come?
    Tell me, Othello: I wonder in my soul,
    What you would ask me, that I should deny,[5833]                  70
    Or stand so mammering on. What! Michael Cassio,[5834]
    That came a-wooing with you, and so many a time[5835]
    When I have spoke of you dispraisingly
    Hath ta'en your part; to have so much to do
    To bring him in! Trust me, I could do much--[5836]                75

    _Oth._ Prithee, no more: let him come when he will;
    I will deny thee nothing.

    _Des._                    Why, this is not a boon;
    'Tis as I should entreat you wear your gloves,[5837]
    Or feed on nourishing dishes, or keep you warm,[5838]
    Or sue to you to do a peculiar profit[5839]                       80
    To your own person: nay, when I have a suit[5840]
    Wherein I mean to touch your love indeed,
    It shall be full of poise and difficult weight,[5841]
    And fearful to be granted.

    _Oth._                     I will deny thee nothing:
    Whereon, I do beseech thee, grant me this,                        85
    To leave me but a little to myself.

    _Des._ Shall I deny you? no: farewell, my lord.

    _Oth._ Farewell, my Desdemona: I'll come to thee straight.[5842]

    _Des._ Emilia, come. Be as your fancies teach you;[5843]
    Whate'er you be, I am obedient.                                   90

                                   [_Exeunt Desdemona and Emilia._[5844]

    _Oth._ Excellent wretch! Perdition catch my soul,[5845]
    But I do love thee! and when I love thee not,
    Chaos is come again.

    _Iago._ My noble lord,--[5846]

    _Oth._                   What dost thou say, Iago?

    _Iago._ Did Michael Cassio, when you woo'd my lady,[5847][5848]   95
    Know of your love?[5847]

    _Oth._ He did, from first to last: why dost thou ask?[5849]

    _Iago._ But for a satisfaction of my thought;[5850]
    No further harm.

    _Oth._           Why of thy thought, Iago?

    _Iago._ I did not think he had been acquainted with her.[5851]   100

    _Oth._ O, yes, and went between us very oft.[5852]

    _Iago._ Indeed!

    _Oth._ Indeed! ay, indeed: discern'st thou aught in that?[5853]
    Is he not honest?

    _Iago._ Honest, my lord!                                         105

    _Oth._ Honest! ay, honest.[5854]

    _Iago._ My lord, for aught I know.

    _Oth._ What dost thou think?

    _Iago._ Think, my lord!

    _Oth._ Think, my lord! By heaven, he echoes me,[5855]            110
    As if there were some monster in his thought[5856]
    Too hideous to be shown. Thou dost mean something:[5857]
    I heard thee say even now, thou likedst not that,[5858]
    When Cassio left my wife: what didst not like?
    And when I told thee he was of my counsel                        115
    In my whole course of wooing, thou criedst 'Indeed!'[5859]
    And didst contract and purse thy brow together,
    As if thou then hadst shut up in thy brain
    Some horrible conceit: if thou dost love me,[5860]
    Show me thy thought.                                             120

    _Iago._ My lord, you know I love you.

    _Oth._                                I think thou dost;
    And for I know thou'rt full of love and honesty[5861]
    And weigh'st thy words before thou givest them breath,[5862]
    Therefore these stops of thine fright me the more:[5863]
    For such things in a false disloyal knave                        125
    Are tricks of custom; but in a man that's just
    They're close delations, working from the heart,[5864]
    That passion cannot rule.

    _Iago._                   For Michael Cassio,
    I dare be sworn I think that he is honest.[5865]

    _Oth._ I think so too.

    _Iago._                Men should be what they seem;[5866]       130
    Or those that be not, would they might seem none![5867]

    _Oth._ Certain, men should be what they seem.[5868]

    _Iago._ Why then I think Cassio's an honest man.[5869]

    _Oth._ Nay, yet there's more in this:
    I prithee, speak to me as to thy thinkings,[5870]                135
    As thou dost ruminate, and give thy worst of thoughts[5871]
    The worst of words.[5872]

    _Iago._             Good my lord, pardon me:
    Though I am bound to every act of duty,[5873]
    I am not bound to that all slaves are free to.[5874]
    Utter my thoughts? Why, say they are vile and false;[5875]       140
    As where's that palace whereinto foul things
    Sometimes intrude not? who has a breast so pure,[5876]
    But some uncleanly apprehensions[5877]
    Keep leets and law-days, and in session sit[5878]
    With meditations lawful?                                         145

    _Oth._ Thou dost conspire against thy friend, Iago,
    If thou but think'st him wrong'd and makest his ear[5879]
    A stranger to thy thoughts.

    _Iago._                     I do beseech you--[5880]
    Though I perchance am vicious in my guess,[5880][5881]
    As, I confess, it is my nature's plague                          150
    To spy into abuses, and oft my jealousy[5882][5883]
    Shapes faults that are not--that your wisdom yet,[5883][5884]
    From one that so imperfectly conceits,[5885]
    Would take no notice, nor build yourself a trouble[5886]
    Out of his scattering and unsure observance.[5887]               155
    It were not for your quiet nor your good,
    Nor for my manhood, honesty, or wisdom,[5888]
    To let you know my thoughts.

    _Oth._                       What dost thou mean?[5889]

    _Iago._ Good name in man and woman, dear my lord,[5890]
    Is the immediate jewel of their souls:[5891]                     160
    Who steals my purse steals trash; 'tis something, nothing;[5892]
    'Twas mine, 'tis his, and has been slave to thousands;
    But he that filches from me my good name
    Robs me of that which not enriches him[5893]
    And makes me poor indeed.                                        165

    _Oth._ By heaven, I'll know thy thoughts.[5894]

    _Iago._ You cannot, if my heart were in your hand;
    Nor shall not, whilst 'tis in my custody.

    _Oth._ Ha!

    _Iago._    O, beware, my lord, of jealousy;[5895]
    It is the green-eyed monster, which doth mock[5896][5897]        170
    The meat it feeds on: that cuckold lives in bliss[5897][5898]
    Who, certain of his fate, loves not his wronger;[5899]
    But, O, what damned minutes tells he o'er
    Who dotes, yet doubts, suspects, yet strongly loves![5900]

    _Oth._ O misery!                                                 175

    _Iago._ Poor and content is rich, and rich enough;
    But riches fineless is as poor as winter[5901]
    To him that ever fears he shall be poor:
    Good heaven, the souls of all my tribe defend[5902]
    From jealousy!

    _Oth._         Why, why is this?[5903]                           180
    Think'st thou I'ld make a life of jealousy,
    To follow still the changes of the moon
    With fresh suspicions? No; to be once in doubt
    Is once to be resolved: exchange me for a goat,[5904]
    When I shall turn the business of my soul                        185
    To such exsufflicate and blown surmises,[5905]
    Matching thy inference. 'Tis not to make me jealous[5906]
    To say my wife is fair, feeds well, loves company,
    Is free of speech, sings, plays and dances well;[5907]
    Where virtue is, these are more virtuous:[5908]                  190
    Nor from mine own weak merits will I draw
    The smallest fear or doubt of her revolt;
    For she had eyes, and chose me. No, Iago;[5909]
    I'll see before I doubt; when I doubt, prove;
    And on the proof, there is no more but this,                     195
    Away at once with love or jealousy![5910]

    _Iago._ I am glad of it; for now I shall have reason[5911][5912]
    To show the love and duty that I bear you
    With franker spirit: therefore, as I am bound,[5911]
    Receive it from me. I speak not yet of proof.[5913]              200
    Look to your wife; observe her well with Cassio;
    Wear your eye thus, not jealous nor secure:[5914]
    I would not have your free and noble nature
    Out of self-bounty be abused; look to't:
    I know our country disposition well;                             205
    In Venice they do let heaven see the pranks[5915]
    They dare not show their husbands; their best conscience[5916]
    Is not to leave't undone, but keep't unknown.[5917]

    _Oth._ Dost thou say so?[5918]

    _Iago._ She did deceive her father, marrying you;                210
    And when she seem'd to shake and fear your looks,
    She loved them most.

    _Oth._               And so she did.

    _Iago._                              Why, go to then;[5919]
    She that so young could give out such a seeming,
    To seel her father's eyes up close as oak--[5920]
    He thought 'twas witchcraft--but I am much to blame;[5911][5921]  215
    I humbly do beseech you of your pardon
    For too much loving you.

    _Oth._                   I am bound to thee for ever.[5911][5922]

    _Iago._ I see this hath a little dash'd your spirits.

    _Oth._ Not a jot, not a jot.

    _Iago._                      I'faith, I fear it has.[5923]
    I hope you will consider what is spoke                           220
    Comes from my love; but I do see you're moved:[5924]
    I am to pray you not to strain my speech
    To grosser issues nor to larger reach
    Than to suspicion.

    _Oth._ I will not.

    _Iago._            Should you do so, my lord,                    225
    My speech should fall into such vile success[5925]
    As my thoughts aim not at. Cassio's my worthy friend--[5926]
    My lord, I see you're moved.[5927]

    _Oth._                       No, not much moved:
    I do not think but Desdemona's honest.[5928]

    _Iago._ Long live she so! and long live you to think so![5929]   230

    _Oth._ And yet, how nature erring from itself--[5930]

    _Iago._ Ay, there's the point: as--to be bold with you--[5931]
    Not to affect many proposed matches
    Of her own clime, complexion and degree,
    Whereto we see in all things nature tends--[5932]                235
    Foh! one may smell in such a will most rank,[5933]
    Foul disproportion, thoughts unnatural.[5934]
    But pardon me: I do not in position[5935]
    Distinctly speak of her; though I may fear[5936]
    Her will, recoiling to her better judgement,                     240
    May fall to match you with her country forms,[5937]
    And happily repent.

    _Oth._              Farewell, farewell:[5938]
    If more thou dost perceive, let me know more;
    Set on thy wife to observe: leave me, Iago.[5939]

    _Iago._ [_Going_] My lord, I take my leave.[5940]                245

    _Oth._ Why did I marry? This honest creature doubtless[5941]
    Sees and knows more, much more, than he unfolds.

    _Iago._ [_Returning_] My lord, I would I might entreat
                your honour[5942][5943]
    To scan this thing no further; leave it to time:[5943][5944]
    Though it be fit that Cassio have his place,[5945]               250
    For sure he fills it up with great ability,
    Yet, if you please to hold him off awhile,[5946]
    You shall by that perceive him and his means:
    Note if your lady strain his entertainment[5947]
    With any strong or vehement importunity;                         255
    Much will be seen in that. In the mean time,
    Let me be thought too busy in my fears--
    As worthy cause I have to fear I am--
    And hold her free, I do beseech your honour.

    _Oth._ Fear not my government.                                   260

    _Iago._ I once more take my leave.                    [_Exit._[5948]

    _Oth._ This fellow's of exceeding honesty,[5949]
    And knows all qualities, with a learned spirit,[5950][5951]
    Of human dealings. If I do prove her haggard,[5951][5952]
    Though that her jesses were my dear heart-strings,               265
    I'ld whistle her off and let her down the wind[5953]
    To prey at fortune. Haply, for I am black[5911][5954]
    And have not those soft parts of conversation
    That chamberers have, or for I am declined
    Into the vale of years,--yet that's not much--[5955]             270
    She's gone; I am abused, and my relief[5956]
    Must be to loathe her. O curse of marriage,[5957]
    That we can call these delicate creatures ours,
    And not their appetites! I had rather be a toad,
    And live upon the vapour of a dungeon,[5958]                     275
    Than keep a corner in the thing I love[5959]
    For others' uses. Yet, 'tis the plague of great ones;[5960]
    Prerogatived are they less than the base;[5961]
    'Tis destiny unshunnable, like death:[5962]
    Even then this forked plague is fated to us                      280
    When we do quicken. Desdemona comes:

                _Re-enter_ DESDEMONA _and_ EMILIA.[5963]

    If she be false, O, then heaven mocks itself![5964]
    I'll not believe 't.[5965]

    _Des._               How now, my dear Othello!
    Your dinner, and the generous islanders[5966]
    By you invited, do attend your presence.                         285

    _Oth._ I am to blame.

    _Des._                     Why do you speak so faintly?[5967][5968]
    Are you not well?[5968]

    _Oth._ I have a pain upon my forehead here.[5969]

    _Des._ Faith, that's with watching; 'twill away again:[5970]
    Let me but bind it hard, within this hour[5971]                  290
    It will be well.

    _Oth._           Your napkin is too little;

           [_He puts the handkerchief from him; and she drops it._[5972]

    Let it alone. Come, I'll go in with you.

    _Des._ I am very sorry that you are not well.

                                  [_Exeunt Othello and Desdemona._[5973]

    _Emil._ I am glad I have found this napkin:[5974]
    This was her first remembrance from the Moor:                    295
    My wayward husband hath a hundred times
    Woo'd me to steal it; but she so loves the token,[5975]
    For he conjured her she should ever keep it,
    That she reserves it evermore about her
    To kiss and talk to. I'll have the work ta'en out,[5976][5977][5978]  300
    And give 't Iago: what he will do with it[5976][5978][5979]
    Heaven knows, not I;[5976]
    I nothing but to please his fantasy.

                         _Re-enter_ IAGO.[5980]

    _Iago._ How now! what do you here alone?

    _Emil._ Do not you chide; I have a thing for you.[5981]          305

    _Iago._ A thing for me? it is a common thing--[5981][5982]

    _Emil._ Ha!

    _Iago._ To have a foolish wife.[5983]

    _Emil._ O, is that all? What will you give me now
    For that same handkerchief?

    _Iago._                     What handkerchief?[5984]             310

    _Emil._ What handkerchief![5984]
    Why, that the Moor first gave to Desdemona;
    That which so often you did bid me steal.

    _Iago._ Hast stol'n it from her?[5985]

    _Emil._ No, faith; she let it drop by negligence,[5986]          315
    And, to the advantage, I being here took 't up.[5987]
    Look, here it is.[5988]

    _Iago._           A good wench; give it me.

    _Emil._ What will you do with 't, that you have been so
            earnest[5989][5990]
    To have me filch it?[5989]

    _Iago._              [_Snatching it_] Why, what's that to you?[5991]

    _Emil._ If 't be not for some purpose of import,[5992]           320
    Give 't me again: poor lady, she'll run mad[5993]
    When she shall lack it.

    _Iago._ Be not acknown on 't; I have use for it.[5994][5995]
    Go, leave me.                                  [_Exit Emilia._[5994]
    I will in Cassio's lodging lose this napkin,[5996]               325
    And let him find it. Trifles light as air
    Are to the jealous confirmations strong
    As proofs of holy writ: this may do something.[5997]
    The Moor already changes with my poison:[5998]
    Dangerous conceits are in their natures poisons,[5999]           330
    Which at the first are scarce found to distaste,
    But with a little act upon the blood[6000]
    Burn like the mines of sulphur. I did say so:[6001]
    Look, where he comes!

                       _Re-enter_ OTHELLO.[6002]

                          Not poppy, nor mandragora,
    Nor all the drowsy syrups of the world,[6003]                    335
    Shall ever medicine thee to that sweet sleep
    Which thou owedst yesterday.

    _Oth._                       Ha! ha! false to me?[6004]

    _Iago._ Why, how now, general! no more of that.

    _Oth._ Avaunt! be gone! thou hast set me on the rack:[6005]
    I swear 'tis better to be much abused                            340
    Than but to know 't a little.

    _Iago._                       How now, my lord![6006]

    _Oth._ What sense had I of her stol'n hours of lust?[6007]
    I saw 't not, thought it not, it harm'd not me:[6008]
    I slept the next night well, was free and merry;[6009]
    I found not Cassio's kisses on her lips:                         345
    He that is robb'd, not wanting what is stol'n,
    Let him not know 't and he's not robb'd at all.

    _Iago._ I am sorry to hear this.

    _Oth._ I had been happy, if the general camp,
    Pioners and all, had tasted her sweet body,[6010]                350
    So I had nothing known. O, now for ever
    Farewell the tranquil mind! farewell content!
    Farewell the plumed troop and the big wars[6011]
    That make ambition virtue! O, farewell,[6012]
    Farewell the neighing steed and the shrill trump,                355
    The spirit-stirring drum, the ear-piercing fife,[6013]
    The royal banner and all quality,
    Pride, pomp and circumstance of glorious war!
    And, O you mortal engines, whose rude throats[6014]
    The immortal Jove's dread clamours counterfeit,[6015]            360
    Farewell! Othello's occupation's gone!

    _Iago._ Is't possible, my lord?[6016]

    _Oth._ Villain, be sure thou prove my love a whore;[6017]
    Be sure of it; give me the ocular proof;[6018]
    Or, by the worth of man's eternal soul,[6019]                    365
    Thou hadst been better have been born a dog[6020]
    Than answer my waked wrath![6021]

    _Iago._                     Is't come to this?

    _Oth._ Make me to see 't; or at the least so prove it,
    That the probation bear no hinge nor loop
    To hang a doubt on; or woe upon thy life!                        370

    _Iago._ My noble lord,--[6022]

    _Oth._ If thou dost slander her and torture me,
    Never pray more; abandon all remorse;
    On horror's head horrors accumulate;[6023]
    Do deeds to make heaven weep, all earth amazed;                  375
    For nothing canst thou to damnation add[6024]
    Greater than that.[6024]

    _Iago._            O grace! O heaven defend me![6025]
    Are you a man? have you a soul or sense?
    God be wi' you; take mine office. O wretched fool,[6026]
    That livest to make thine honesty a vice![6027]                  380
    O monstrous world! Take note, take note, O world,[6028]
    To be direct and honest is not safe.
    I thank you for this profit, and from hence
    I'll love no friend sith love breeds such offence.[6029]

    _Oth._ Nay, stay: thou shouldst be honest.[6030]                 385

    _Iago._ I should be wise; for honesty's a fool,
    And loses that it works for.[6031]

    _Oth._                       By the world,[6032]
    I think my wife be honest, and think she is not;[6032][6033]
    I think that thou art just, and think thou art not:[6032]
    I'll have some proof. Her name, that was as fresh[6032][6034]    390
    As Dian's visage, is now begrimed and black[6032]
    As mine own face. If there be cords, or knives,[6032]
    Poison, or fire, or suffocating streams,[6032][6035]
    I'll not endure it. Would I were satisfied![6032]

    _Iago._ I see, sir, you are eaten up with passion:[6032][6036]   395
    I do repent me that I put it to you.
    You would be satisfied?

    _Oth._                  Would! nay, I will.[6037]

    _Iago._ And may: but, how? how satisfied, my lord?
    Would you, the supervisor, grossly gape on?[6038]
    Behold her topp'd?[6039]

    _Oth._             Death and damnation! O!                       400

    _Iago._ It were a tedious difficulty, I think,
    To bring them to that prospect: damn them then,[6040]
    If ever mortal eyes do see them bolster[6041]
    More than their own! What then? how then?[6042]
    What shall I say? Where's satisfaction?[6043]                    405
    It is impossible you should see this,
    Were they as prime as goats, as hot as monkeys,[6044]
    As salt as wolves in pride, and fools as gross
    As ignorance made drunk. But yet, I say,
    If imputation and strong circumstances,                          410
    Which lead directly to the door of truth,
    Will give you satisfaction, you may have 't.[6045]

    _Oth._ Give me a living reason she's disloyal.[6046]

    _Iago._ I do not like the office:
    But sith I am enter'd in this cause so far,[5911][6047]          415
    Prick'd to 't by foolish honesty and love,
    I will go on. I lay with Cassio lately,[6048]
    And being troubled with a raging tooth,[6049]
    I could not sleep.[6049]
    There are a kind of men so loose of soul,[6049]                  420
    That in their sleeps will mutter their affairs:[6049][6050]
    One of this kind is Cassio:[6049]
    In sleep I heard him say 'Sweet Desdemona,
    Let us be wary, let us hide our loves;'[6051]
    And then, sir, would he gripe and wring my hand,                 425
    Cry 'O sweet creature!' and then kiss me hard,[6052]
    As if he pluck'd up kisses by the roots,
    That grew upon my lips: then laid his leg[6053][6054]
    Over my thigh, and sigh'd and kiss'd, and then[6053][6055]
    Cried 'Cursed fate that gave thee to the Moor!'[6053][6055]      430

    _Oth._ O monstrous! monstrous!

    _Iago._                        Nay, this was but his dream.[6056]

    _Oth._ But this denoted a foregone conclusion:[6057]
    'Tis a shrewd doubt, though it be but a dream.[6058]

    _Iago._ And this may help to thicken other proofs[6058]
    That do demonstrate thinly.

    _Oth._                      I'll tear her all to pieces.         435

    _Iago._ Nay, but be wise: yet we see nothing done;[6059]
    She may be honest yet. Tell me but this;
    Have you not sometimes seen a handkerchief[6060]
    Spotted with strawberries in your wife's hand?[6061][6062]

    _Oth._ I gave her such a one; 'twas my first gift.               440

    _Iago._ I know not that: but such a handkerchief--[6060]
    I am sure it was your wife's--did I to-day[5911][6061]
    See Cassio wipe his beard with.

    _Oth._                          If it be that,--[6063]

    _Iago._ If it be that, or any that was hers,[6064]
    It speaks against her with the other proofs.                     445

    _Oth._ O, that the slave had forty thousand lives!
    One is too poor, too weak for my revenge.
    Now do I see 'tis true. Look here, Iago;[6065]
    All my fond love thus do I blow to heaven:
    'Tis gone.[6066]                                                 450
    Arise, black vengeance, from thy hollow cell![6067]
    Yield up, O love, thy crown and hearted throne[6068]
    To tyrannous hate! Swell, bosom, with thy fraught,
    For 'tis of aspics' tongues!

    _Iago._                      Yet be content.[6069]

    _Oth._ O, blood, blood, blood![6070]                             455

    _Iago._ Patience, I say; your mind perhaps may change.[6071]

    _Oth._ Never, Iago. Like to the Pontic sea,[6072][6073]
    Whose icy current and compulsive course[6072][6074]
    Ne'er feels retiring ebb, but keeps due on[6072][6075]
    To the Propontic and the Hellespont;[6072]                       460
    Even so my bloody thoughts, with violent pace,[6072]
    Shall ne'er look back, ne'er ebb to humble love,[6072][6076]
    Till that a capable and wide revenge[6072]
    Swallow them up. Now, by yond marble heaven,[6072][6077]
    In the due reverence of a sacred vow           [_Kneels._[6078]  465
    I here engage my words.

    _Iago._                 Do not rise yet.            [_Kneels._[6079]
    Witness, you ever-burning lights above,[6080]
    You elements that clip us round about,[6081]
    Witness that here Iago doth give up
    The execution of his wit, hands, heart,[6082]                    470
    To wrong'd Othello's service! Let him command,
    And to obey shall be in me remorse,[6083][6084]
    What bloody business ever.                 [_They rise._[6084][6085]

    _Oth._                     I greet thy love,
    Not with vain thanks, but with acceptance bounteous,
    And will upon the instant put thee to 't:                        475
    Within these three days let me hear thee say
    That Cassio's not alive.

    _Iago._ My friend is dead; 'tis done at your request:[6086][6087]
    But let her live.[6086]

    _Oth._            Damn her, lewd minx! O, damn her![6088]
    Come, go with me apart; I will withdraw,                         480
    To furnish me with some swift means of death
    For the fair devil. Now art thou my lieutenant.[6089]

    Iago. I am your own for ever.                             [_Exeunt._


SCENE IV. _Before the castle._

             _Enter_ DESDEMONA, EMILIA, _and_ Clown.[6090]

    _Des._ Do you know, sirrah, where Lieutenant Cassio lies?[6091]

    _Clo._ I dare not say he lies any where.

    _Des._ Why, man?

    _Clo._ He's a soldier; and for one to say a soldier lies, is[6092]
    stabbing.                                                          5

    _Des._ Go to: where lodges he?[6093]

    _Clo._ To tell you where he lodges, is to tell you where[6094]
    I lie.[6094]

    _Des._ Can any thing be made of this?[6094]

    _Clo._ I know not where he lodges; and for me to devise           10
    a lodging, and say he lies here or he lies there, were to lie[6095]
    in mine own throat.[6096]

    _Des._ Can you inquire him out and be edified by report?[6097]

    _Clo._ I will catechize the world for him; that is, make
    questions and by them answer.[6098]                               15

    _Des._ Seek him, bid him come hither: tell him I have
    moved my lord on his behalf and hope all will be well.[6099]

    _Clo._ To do this is within the compass of man's wit, and[6100]
    therefore I will attempt the doing it.                [_Exit._[6101]

    _Des._ Where should I lose that handkerchief, Emilia?[6102]       20

    _Emil._ I know not, madam.

    _Des._ Believe me, I had rather have lost my purse[6103]
    Full of crusadoes: and, but my noble Moor
    Is true of mind and made of no such baseness
    As jealous creatures are, it were enough[6104]                    25
    To put him to ill thinking.[6104]

    _Emil._                     Is he not jealous?

    _Des._ Who, he? I think the sun where he was born
    Drew all such humours from him.

    _Emil._                         Look, where he comes.

    _Des._ I will not leave him now till Cassio[6105]
    Be call'd to him.[6105]

                         _Enter_ OTHELLO.[6106]

                      How is't with you, my lord?[6107]               30

    _Oth._ Well, my good lady. [_Aside_] O, hardness to dissemble![6108]
    How do you, Desdemona?

    _Des._                 Well, my good lord.[6109]

    _Oth._ Give me your hand: this hand is moist, my lady.[6110]

    _Des._ It yet has felt no age nor known no sorrow.[6111]

    _Oth._ This argues fruitfulness and liberal heart:                35
    Hot, hot, and moist: this hand of yours requires[6112]
    A sequester from liberty, fasting and prayer,[6113]
    Much castigation, exercise devout;[6114]
    For here's a young and sweating devil here,[6115]
    That commonly rebels. 'Tis a good hand,                           40
    A frank one.[6116]

    _Des._       You may, indeed, say so;
    For 'twas that hand that gave away my heart.

    _Oth._ A liberal hand: the hearts of old gave hands;[6117]
    But our new heraldry is hands, not hearts.

    _Des._ I cannot speak of this. Come now, your promise.[6118]      45

    _Oth._ What promise, chuck?

    _Des._ I have sent to bid Cassio come speak with you.

    _Oth._ I have a salt and sorry rheum offends me;[6119]
    Lend me thy handkerchief.[6120]

    _Des._ Here, my lord.                                             50

    _Oth._ That which I gave you.

    _Des._ I have it not about me.

    _Oth._ Not?[6121]

    _Des._ No, indeed, my lord.[6122]

    _Oth._ That's a fault. That handkerchief[6120][6123]              55
    Did an Egyptian to my mother give;
    She was a charmer, and could almost read
    The thoughts of people: she told her, while she kept it
    'Twould make her amiable and subdue my father[6124]
    Entirely to her love, but if she lost it[6125]                    60
    Or made a gift of it, my father's eye
    Should hold her loathed and his spirits should hunt[6126]
    After new fancies: she dying gave it me,
    And bid me, when my fate would have me wive,[6127]
    To give it her. I did so: and take heed on't;                     65
    Make it a darling like your precious eye;
    To lose't or give't away were such perdition[6128]
    As nothing else could match.

    _Des._                       Is't possible?

    _Oth._ 'Tis true: there's magic in the web of it:
    A sibyl, that had number'd in the world[6129]                     70
    The sun to course two hundred compasses,[6130]
    In her prophetic fury sew'd the work;[6131]
    The worms were hallow'd that did breed the silk;[6132]
    And it was dyed in mummy which the skilful[6133]
    Conserved of maidens' hearts.

    _Des._                        Indeed! is't true?[6134]            75

    _Oth._ Most veritable; therefore look to't well.

    _Des._ Then would to God that I had never seen't![6135]

    _Oth._ Ha! wherefore?

    _Des._ Why do you speak so startingly and rash?[6136]

    _Oth._ Is't lost? is't gone? speak, is it out o' the way?[6137]   80

    _Des._ Heaven bless us![6138]

    _Oth._ Say you?

    _Des._ It is not lost; but what an if it were?[6139]

    _Oth._ How![6140]

    _Des._ I say, it is not lost.                                     85

    _Oth._ Fetch't, let me see it.[6141]

    _Des._ Why, so I can, sir, but I will not now.[6142]
    This is a trick to put me from my suit:
    Pray you, let Cassio be received again.[6143]

    _Oth._ Fetch me the handkerchief: my mind misgives.[6144][6145][6146]  90

    _Des._ Come, come;[6147]
    You'll never meet a more sufficient man.[6147][6148]

    _Oth._ The handkerchief![6145]

    _Des._                   I pray, talk me of Cassio.[6149]

    _Oth._ The handkerchief![6149]

    _Des._                   A man that all his time
    Hath founded his good fortunes on your love,[6150]                95
    Shared dangers with you,--[6151][6152]

    _Oth._ The handkerchief![6151]

    _Des._ In sooth, you are to blame.[6151][6153]

    _Oth._ Away!                                    [_Exit._[6151][6154]

    _Emil._ Is not this man jealous?[6151][6155]                     100

    _Des._ I ne'er saw this before.
    Sure there's some wonder in this handkerchief:[6156]
    I am most unhappy in the loss of it.[6157]

    _Emil._ 'Tis not a year or two shows us a man:
    They are all but stomachs and we all but food;[6158]             105
    They eat us hungerly, and when they are full[6159]
    They belch us. Look you, Cassio and my husband.

                    _Enter_ CASSIO _and_ IAGO.[6160]

    _Iago._ There is no other way; 'tis she must do't:[6161]
    And, lo, the happiness! go and importune her.

    _Des._ How now, good Cassio! what's the news with you?           110

    _Cas._ Madam, my former suit: I do beseech you
    That by your virtuous means I may again[6162]
    Exist, and be a member of his love
    Whom I with all the office of my heart[6163]
    Entirely honour: I would not be delay'd.[6164]                   115
    If my offence be of such mortal kind
    That nor my service past nor present sorrows[6165]
    Nor purposed merit in futurity
    Can ransom me into his love again,
    But to know so must be my benefit;                               120
    So shall I clothe me in a forced content
    And shut myself up in some other course[6166]
    To fortune's alms.[6167]

    _Des._             Alas, thrice-gentle Cassio!
    My advocation is not now in tune;
    My lord is not my lord, nor should I know him                    125
    Were he in favour as in humour alter'd.
    So help me every spirit sanctified,
    As I have spoken for you all my best
    And stood within the blank of his displeasure[6168]
    For my free speech! You must awhile be patient:                  130
    What I can do I will; and more I will
    Than for myself I dare: let that suffice you.

    _Iago._ Is my lord angry?

    _Emil._                   He went hence but now,
    And certainly in strange unquietness.

    _Iago._ Can he be angry? I have seen the cannon,                 135
    When it hath blown his ranks into the air,
    And, like the devil, from his very arm
    Puff'd his own brother; and can he be angry?[6169]
    Something of moment then: I will go meet him:
    There's matter in't indeed if he be angry.                       140

    _Des._ I prithee, do so.                         [_Exit Iago._[6170]
                                  Something sure of state,
    Either from Venice or some unhatch'd practice[6171]
    Made demonstrable here in Cyprus to him,[6172]
    Hath puddled his clear spirit; and in such cases[6173]
    Men's natures wrangle with inferior things,                      145
    Though great ones are their object. 'Tis even so;[6174][6175]
    For let our finger ache, and it indues[6174][6176]
    Our other healthful members even to that sense[6174][6177]
    Of pain: nay, we must think men are not gods,[6174]
    Nor of them look for such observancy[6178]                       150
    As fits the bridal. Beshrew me much, Emilia,
    I was, unhandsome warrior as I am,[6179]
    Arraigning his unkindness with my soul;
    But now I find I had suborn'd the witness,
    And he's indicted falsely.[6180]                                 155

    _Emil._ Pray heaven it be state-matters, as you think,[6181][6182]
    And no conception nor no jealous toy[6181][6183][6184]
    Concerning you.[6181]

    _Des._ Alas the day, I never gave him cause!

    _Emil._ But jealous souls will not be answer'd so;[6184]         160
    They are not ever jealous for the cause,[6185]
    But jealous for they are jealous: 'tis a monster[6186][6187]
    Begot upon itself, born on itself.[6188]

    _Des._ Heaven keep that monster from Othello's mind![6189]

    _Emil._ Lady, amen.                                              165

    _Des._ I will go seek him. Cassio, walk hereabout:[6190]
    If I do find him fit, I'll move your suit,
    And seek to effect it to my uttermost.[6191]

    _Cas._ I humbly thank your ladyship.

                                         [_Exeunt Desdemona and Emilia._

                         _Enter_ BIANCA.[6192]

    _Bian._ Save you, friend Cassio!

    _Cas._                       What make you from home?[6193]      170
    How is it with you, my most fair Bianca?[6194]
    I'faith, sweet love, I was coming to your house.[6195]

    _Bian._ And I was going to your lodging, Cassio.
    What, keep a week away? seven days and nights?
    Eight score eight hours? and lovers' absent hours,[6196]         175
    More tedious than the dial eight score times?
    O weary reckoning![6197]

    _Cas._             Pardon me, Bianca:
    I have this while with leaden thoughts been press'd;[6198]
    But I shall in a more continuate time[6199]
    Strike off this score of absence. Sweet Bianca,[6200]            180

                                 [_Giving her Desdemona's handkerchief._

    Take me this work out.

    _Bian._                O Cassio, whence came this?[6201]
    This is some token from a newer friend:[6202]
    To the felt absence now I feel a cause:[6202]
    Is't come to this? Well, well.

    _Cas._                         Go to, woman![6203]
    Throw your vile guesses in the devil's teeth,[6204]              185
    From whence you have them. You are jealous now[6186]
    That this is from some mistress, some remembrance:
    No, by my faith, Bianca.

    _Bian._                  Why, whose is it?[6205]

    _Cas._ I know not, sweet: I found it in my chamber.[6206]
    I like the work well: ere it be demanded--                       190
    As like enough it will--I'ld have it copied:[6207]
    Take it, and do't; and leave me for this time.

    _Bian._ Leave you! wherefore?

    _Cas._ I do attend here on the general;
    And think it no addition, nor my wish,                           195
    To have him see me woman'd.

    _Bian._                     Why, I pray you?[6208]

    _Cas._ Not that I love you not.[6208]

    _Bian._                         But that you do not love me.[6209]
    I pray you, bring me on the way a little;
    And say if I shall see you soon at night.[6210]

    _Cas._ 'Tis but a little way that I can bring you;               200
    For I attend here: but I'll see you soon.

    _Bian._ 'Tis very good; I must be circumstanced.    [_Exeunt._[6211]

FOOTNOTES:

[5749] ACT III. SCENE I.] Actus Tertius. Scena Prima. Ff. Actus 3.
Scæna 1. Q₂ Q₃. om. Q₁.

Before the castle.] Capell. Othello's Palace. Rowe. Before Othello's
Palace. Theobald.

Enter....] Enter Cassio, with Musitians and the Clowne. Q₁. Enter
Cassio, Musitians, and Clowne. Ff. Enter Cassio, with Musitians. Q₂ Q₃.

[5750] _Masters_] _Master_ Q₃.

[5751] _morrow, general_] _morrow to the general_ Collier MS.

[Music. Enter Clown.] They play, and enter the Clowne. Q₂ Q₃. Omitted
in the rest. Musick plays; and enter Clown from the House. Theobald.

[5752] _have_] Ff. _ha_ Qq.

_been in_] F₄. _bin in_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _bin at_ Qq.

[5753] _speak_] _play_ Capell (corrected in Errata). _squeak_ Collier
(Collier MS.)

[5754] First Mus.] 1. M. Capell. Mus. Ff. Boy Qq.

[5755] _pray you,_] Ff. _pray, cald_ Q₁ Q₂. _pray you, cald_ Q₃.

[5756] _tail_] _tayle_ Qq. _tale_ Ff.

[5757] _tale_] Ff. _tayle_ Qq.

[5758] _here's_] _hee's_ F₁. _her's_ Q₃.

[5759] _for love's sake_] _of all loves_ Q₁.

[5760] _more_] om. F₂ Q₃ F₃ F₄.

[5761] _have_ Ff. _ha_ Qq.

[5762] _up_] Ff. om. Qq.

_for I'll away_] _and hye away_ Hanmer. _fly away_ Ritson conj.

[5763] _into air_] om. Q₁.

[Exeunt....] Theobald. Exit Mu. F₁. Exit Mus. F₂ F₃. Exit Musi. F₄. om.
Qq.

[5764] _hear, my_] _heare my_ Qq. _heare me, mine_ Ff (_hear_ F₃ F₄).
_hear, mine_ Theobald (Warburton and Bentley conj.)

[5765] _I hear you_] In a separate line in Ff.

[5766] _general's wife_] _Generals wife_ Q₂ Q₃. _Cenerals wife_ Q₁.
_Generall_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _General_ F₄.

[5767] _her_] _of her_ Rowe.

[5768] _seem to_] _soon so_ Singer (Singer MS.) _seem so to_ Collier
(Collier MS.)

[5769] Cas. _Do ... friend._] Omitted in Ff.

_good my_] _my good_ Rowe.

[Exit Clown.] Exit Clo. Ff Q₂. Exit Col. Q₃. om Q₁.

[5770] Enter Iago.] As in Rowe. After _her_, line 28, in Qq Ff.

[5771] _have_] Ff. _ha_ Qq.

[5772] _a-bed_] Ff. _a bed_ Qq.

[5773] _Why ... Desdemona_] Arranged as in Capell. Three lines, ending
_parted ... her, ... Desdemona_, in Qq. Three, ending _parted ...
wife; ... Desdemona_, in Ff. Johnson reads as four lines, ending
_parted ... wife; ... her ... Desdemona._

[5774] _Iago_] om. Pope.

[5775] _to her_] om. Pope.

[5776] _virtuous_] om. Pope, ending the lines as Ff.

[5777] _to you_] om. Pope

[5778] _humbly_] om. Lettsom conj.

_for't_] _for it_ Q₁.

[Exit Iago.] Capell. Exit. Qq Ff, after line 38.

[5779] _I never knew A_] _I ne'er knew_ S. Walker conj., reading I
_humbly ... Florentine_ or _I ne'er ... honest_ as one line.

[5780] _A Florentine_] _A man_ Capell, reading 38-40 as two lines, the
first ending _for't._

[5781] _sure_] Ff. _soone_ Qq.

[5782] _that_] om. Seymour conj.

_wholesome_] om. Pope.

[5783] _refuse you_] _refuse_ Q₂ Q₃.

_he protests_] om. Hanmer.

[5784] _likings_] _liking_ S. Walker conj.

[5785] _To ... front_] Omitted in Ff.

_safest_] _first_ Johnson. _saf'st_ Capell.

[5786] _Desdemona_] Qq. _Desdemon_ Ff.

_you_] om. F₂ F₃ F₄.

[5787] Cas. _I ... you._] Omitted in Q₁.

_I am_] _I'm_ Pope.

[Exeunt.] om. F₁ F₂.

[5788] SCENE II.] Scæna Secunda. Ff. Scene continued in Rowe.

A room ...] Capell. Gentlemen.] Ff. other Gentlemen. Qq.

[5789] _by him_] _bid him_ Capell. conj.

_senate_] Ff. _state_ Qq.

[5790] _on_] _to_ Q₂ Q₃.

[5791] _Well,_] om. Pope.

[5792] _We'll_] F₃ F₄. _Well_ F₁. _Weel_ F₂. _We_ Qq.

[5793] SCENE III.] Scæna Tertia. Ff. SCENE II. Rowe.

The garden ...] Dyce. An Apartment. Rowe. An Apartment in the Palace.
Theobald. The same. Before the Castle. Capell.

[5794] _Good ... husband_] One line in Qq. Two, the first ending _do:_
in Ff.

_warrant_] Ff. _know_ Qq.

[5795] _case_] Qq. _cause_ Ff.

[5796] _Do not doubt_] _doubt not_ Pope.

[5797] _Bounteous_] _Most bounteous_ Pope.

[5798] _I know't_:] Ff. _O sir_, Qq.

[5799] _You have_] _You've_ Pope.

_you well_] om. Q₃.

[5800] _in strangeness_] _in strangest_ Qq. _in's strangest_ Anon. conj.

_farther_] _further_ Steevens (1793).

[5801] _That_] _The_ Q₁.

[5802] _circumstance_] Qq. _circumstances_ Ff.

[5803] _will_] _would_ Jennens.

[5804] _place:_] _place?_ Q₂.

[5805] _shall never_] _shan't_ Hanmer.

[5806] _thy cause_] _thee cause:_ Q₁.

[5807] SCENE IV. Pope.

Enter ... at a distance.] Enter ... at distance. Theobald. Enter
Othello, Iago, and Gentlemen. Qq. Enter Othello and Iago. Ff.
Transferred to follow line 34 by Dyce.

[5808] _Nay_] Q₂ Q₃. _Why_ Q₁ Ff.

[5809] _I am_] _I'm_ Pope.

[5810] _purposes_] Ff. _purpose_ Qq.

[5811] _Well,_] _Well, well,_ Capell, ending lines 33, 34 _well, ...
that._

[5812] _if--_] Ff. _if,_ Q₁. _if,--_ Q₂ Q₃.

[5813] _it_] om. Seymour conj.

[5814] _steal_] _sneake_ Q₁.

[5815] _you_] Qq F₃ F₄. _your_ F₁ F₂.

_do_] om. Pope.

[5816] _I do ... lord!_] As one line, S. Walker conj.

[5817] [going towards him. Capell.

[5818] _Cassio_] F₂ F₃ F₄. _Cassio:_ F₁. _Cassio,_ Qq.

[5819] _take_] _make_ Warburton.

[5820] _Went ... humbled,_] As one line, S. Walker conj.

[5821] _Ay, sooth_] Capell. _I, sooth_ F₃ F₄. _I sooth_ F₁ F₂. _Yes
faith_ Qq. _In sooth_ Rowe. _I' sooth_ Johnson.

[5822] _hath_] Ff. _has_ Qq.

_grief_] _griefes_ Qq.

[5823] _To suffer_] _I suffer_ Q₁.

[5824] _Desdemona_] Q₁ Q₃ F₄. _Desdemon_ The rest.

[5825] _The sooner_] _Sooner_ Pope.

[5826] _No, not_] _Not_ Pope.

[5827] _or_] Qq. _on_ Ff.

[5828] _On_] _Or_ Pope.

_noon_] _morne_ Qq.

_night; on_] Ff. _night, or_ Qq.

_Wednesday_] Q₂ F₃ F₄. _Wensday_ Q₁ F₁ F₂. _wedensday_ Q₃.

[5829] _prithee_] _praythee_ F₂.

[5830] _in faith_] _Ifaith_ Q₁ Q₂. _I saith_ Q₃.

[5831] _wars_] _war_ Capell.

_examples_] Qq. _example_ Ff.

[5832] _their_] Rowe. _her_ Qq Ff. _our_ Collier (Collier MS.) _the_
Singer (ed. 2).

_almost_] _at most_ Anon. conj.

[5833] _you would_] Ff. _you could_ Qq.

_I should_] Qq F₁. _I would_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[5834] _mammering_] _mam'ring_ Ff Q₂ Q₃. _muttering_ Q₁. _mummering_
Johnson.

[5835] _so_] om. Pope.

[5836] _Trust me_] _Birlady_ Q₁.

_much--_] _much,--_ Q₂ Q₃. _much._ The rest.

[5837] _gloves_] _cloths_ Warburton.

[5838] _dishes_] _meats_ Pope.

[5839] _a_] om. Pope.

[5840] _a suit_] _suit_ F₃ F₄.

[5841] _difficult weight_] _difficulty_ Q₁.

[5842] _Desdemona_] _Desdemon_ Dyce (ed. 2).

_I'll_] _I will_ Capell.

_to thee_] om. Pope.

[5843] _Be_] _be_ Ff. _be it_ Qq.

[To Othello. Jennens.

[5844] [Exeunt....] Exeunt Des. and Em. Q₂ Q₃. Exit Desd. and Em. Q₁.
Exit. Ff. Exeunt. Manent Othello and Jago. Pope.

[5845] SCENE V. Pope.

_wretch_] _wench_ Theobald.

[5846] _lord,--_] Theobald. _lord._ Qq Ff.

[5847] _Did ... love?_] Arranged as in Qq. Two lines, the first ending
_Cassio,_ in Ff.

[5848] _you_] _he_ F₁.

_woo'd_] Ff. _wooed_ Qq.

[5849] _He ... ask?_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[5850] _a_] om. Q₃.

_my thought_] _my thoughts_ Q₁.

[5851] _he had_] _he'd_ Pope.

_her_] Qq. _hir_ F₁. _it_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[5852] _oft_] _often_ Q₁.

[5853] _Indeed! ay, indeed:_] _Indeed:_ Steevens conj.

_ay,_] Rowe. _I_ Ff Q₂ Q₃. om. Q₁.

_in that_] _of that_ Rowe.

[5854] _Honest! ay, honest._] _Ay, honest._ Steevens (1793), reading
_Is he ... honest_ as one line.

[5855] _Think ... me,_] One line in Qq Ff. Steevens (1793) reads
_What ... lord!_ as one line; _By heaven ... me,_ as another.

_By ... echoes_] _By heaven he ecchoes_ Q₁. _Alas, thou ecchos't_ Ff.
(_eccos't_ F₂). _why dost thou ecchoe_ Q₂ Q₃. _why, by heav'n, thou
eccho'st_ Pope.

[5856] _his_] Q₁. _thy_ Ff Q₂ Q₃.

[5857] _dost_] _didst_ Q₁.

[5858] _even_] Ff. _but_ Qq.

_likedst_] _lik'dst_ Pope. _lik'st_ Qq Ff.

[5859] _In_] Qq. _Of_ Ff. See note (IV).

[with admiring action. Anon. MS. See note (IV).

[5860] _conceit_] _counsell_ Q₁. _conceits_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[5861] _And_] om. F₂ F₃ F₄.

_thou'rt_] Ff. _thou art_ Qq.

_love and_] om. Hanmer.

[5862] _weigh'st_] Ff. _weighest_ Qq.

_givest_] _give_ Q₁.

_them_] Ff. _em_ Q₁. _'em_ Q₂ Q₃.

[5863] _fright_] _affright_ Q₁.

[5864] _They're_] Ff. _They are_ Qq.

_close delations_] Johnson. _close denotements_ Q₁. _close dilations_
F₁ Q₂ Q₃. _cold delations_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _distillations_ Hanmer.

[5865] _be sworn_] _presume_ Q₁.

_sworn I_] _sworn--I_ Lettsom conj.

_that_] om Q₃.

[5866] _what_] _that_ Q₁.

[5867] _seem none!_] _seeme,_ Q₃. _seem knaves!_ Warburton. _be known!_
Heath conj.

[5868] _Certain, men_] _Certain men,_ Q₃.

[5869] _Cassio's_] _that Cassio's_ Steevens (1793), ending line 132 at
_then_.

[5870] _prithee_] _preethee_ Q₁. _pray thee_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

_as_] om. Q₁.

[5871] _As ... worst_] One line in Hanmer.

_thy ... thoughts_] Ff Q₂. _the worst of thought_ Q₁. _thy thoughts_ Q₃.

[5872] _words_] _word_ Q₁.

[5873] _Though I am_] _I am not_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[5874] _that all_] Qq. _that: all_ Ff.

_free to._] _free to;_ Rowe. _free to,_ Qq. _free:_ Ff.

[5875] _thoughts?_] Q₁ Ff. _thoughts:_ Q₂ Q₃.

_they are_] _they're_ Pope.

_vile_] Qq. _vild_ Ff.

[5876] _a breast_] Qq. _that breast_ Ff.

[5877] _But some_] Qq. _Wherein_ Ff.

[5878] _session_] Qq. _sessions_ Ff.

_sit_] _fit_ Q₂ Q₃.

[5879] _think'st_] Ff. _thinkest_ Qq.

[5880] _I do ... perchance_] _I thought--beseech you--I do--perchance_
Becket conj.

_you-- Though I perchance_] Malone (Henley conj.) _you, Though I
perchance_ Qq Ff. _you, Though, I-- perchance_ Johnson.

[5881] _Though_] _'Cause_ Hanmer. _Think_ Warburton (Theobald conj.)

[5882] _abuses_] _abuse_ Pope.

[5883] _oft ... Shapes_] Qq. _of ... Shapes_ Ff. _of ... Shape_ Grant
White.

[5884] _that ... yet_] _I intreate you then_ Q₁ and Pope.

_yet_] Q₂ Q₃. om. Ff.

[5885] _imperfectly_] _improbably_ Johnson. See note (V).

_conceits_] _coniects_ Q₁. _conjects_ Warburton.

[5886] _Would_] _You'd_ Q₁. _Will_ Q₃.

_Would ... build_] _Your wisdom would not build_ Pope.

_notice_] _note_ Anon. conj.

[5887] _his_] Ff. _my_ Qq.

[5888] _or_] Qq. _and_ Ff.

[5889] _What ... mean?_] _Zouns._ Q₁.

[5890] _woman_] _woman's_ Q₁.

[5891] _their_] Ff. _our_ Qq.

[5892] _Who ... nothing;_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_something, nothing_] _something-nothing_ Staunton.

[5893] _not_] _naught_ Grant White conj.

[5894] _By heaven_] Q₁. om. Ff Q₂ Q₃.

_thoughts_] _thought_ Q₁.

[5895] Oth. _Ha!_] om. Q₁.

_beware, my lord, of_] _beware_ Q₁.

[5896] _the_] _a_ Q₂ Q₃.

_mock_] F₃ F₄. _mocke_ Qq F₁ F₂. _make_ Hanmer (Theobald conj.)
_mamock_ Smith conj. _'mock_ (for _mamock_) Grey conj. _muck_ Becket
conj.

[5897] _mock ... on:_] _mock-- The meat it feeds on!_ Anon. conj.
(1814).

[5898] _The_] _That_ Q₁.

_that_] _What_ Q₃.

[5899] _Who ... wronger_] _Who certaine of his wronger_ Q₃.

_Who, certain_] _Who's certain_ Capell conj.

_loves not_] _hates not_ Steevens's reprint of Q₁. See note (VI).

[5900] _strongly_] Qq. _soundly_ Ff. _fondly_ Knight.

[5901] _riches_] _rich_ Q₃.

_fineless_] _endless_ Pope.

_as poor_] _poor_ Q₃.

_winter_] _want_ Theobald conj. (withdrawn).

[5902] _heaven_] _God_ Q₁.

[5903] _Why, why_] Qq. _Why? why_ Ff.

_this?_] _this, Iago?_ Capell.

[5904] _Is once_] Qq. _Is_ Ff. _is At once_ Hanmer, ending the previous
line at _is_.

[5905] _exsufflicate_] _exufflicate_ Qq F₁ F₂ F₃. _exufflicated_ F₄.
_exsuffolate_ Hanmer. _exsufflate_ Richardson conj.

_blown_] _blowne_ Qq. _blow'd_ F₁. _blowed_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[5906] _thy_] _the_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[5907] _well_] Qq. om. Ff.

[5908] _these_] _there_ Jackson conj.

_are more_] Qq F₁. _are most_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _make more_ Warburton.

[5909] _chose_] _chosen_ Q₂ Q₃.

[5910] _or_] _and_ Q (1695) and Hanmer.

[5911] _I am_] _I'm_ Pope.

[5912] _it_] Qq. _this_ Ff.

[5913] _of_] _for_ Q₃.

[5914] _Wear_] _Were_ Q₃.

_eye_] _eyes_ Ff.

_jealous_] _Iealious_ F₁ F₂.

[5915] _heaven_] _God_ Q₁.

[5916] _They ... conscience_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_not_] om. Q₁.

[5917] _leave't_] Q₁ Ff. _leave_ Q₂ Q₃.

_keep't_] Q₃. _keepe't_ Q₃. _keepe_ Q₁. _kept_ Ff.

[5918] _so?_] _so._ Q₁.

[5919] _Why,_] om. Pope.

[5920] _seel_] _seele_ F₁ F₂. _seale_ Qq F₃. _seal_ F₄.

_oak_] _owls_ Johnson conj. _hawk's_ Staunton conj.

[5921] _He ... blame;_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_to blame_] F₄. _too blame_ The rest.

[5922] _to_] _to to_ F₂.

_thee_] _you_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[5923] _Not a jot_] _No_ Seymour conj.

_I'faith_] _Ifaith_ Q₁. _Trust me_ Ff Q₂ Q₃.

[5924] _Comes ... moved:_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_my_] _your_ F₁.

_you're_] Rowe. _you are_ Qq. _y'are_ Ff.

[5925] _should_] _would_ Pope.

_such_] om. Q₃.

_vile_] Qq. _vilde_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _vild_ F₄.

_success_] _excess_ Pope (ed. 2).

[5926] _As ... friend--_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_As_] Qq. _Which_ Ff.

_aim not at_] _aime not at_ Qq. _aym'd not_ F₁ F₂. _aim'd not_ F₃ F₄.
_aim'd not at_ Rowe.

_worthy_] _trusty_ Q₁.

[5927] _you're_] Rowe. _you are_ Qq. _y'are_ Ff.

[5928] _I_] om. Q₃.

[5929] _Long ... so!_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[5930] _itself--_] _it self--_ F₃ F₄. _it selfe--_ F₁ F₂. _it selfe._
Qq.

[5931] _Ay ... you--_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[5932] _Whereto_] _Wherein_ Q₃.

[5933] _Foh!_] _Foh,_ Ff. _Fie_ Qq.

_one_] Ff. _we_ Qq.

_most_] _must_ Q₃.

[5934] _disproportion_] Qq. _disproportions_ Ff.

[5935] _position_] _suspicion_ Collier MS.

[5936] _her; though I may fear_] _her, though I may fear:_ Nicholson
conj.

[5937] _fall_] _fail_ Nicholson conj.

[5938] _happily_] _haply so_ Pope.

_Farewell, farewell_] _Farewell_ Qq, ending the lines _if more ...
on ... Iago._

[5939] _Set ... Iago._] As in Rowe. Two lines in Ff.

[5940] [Going] Rowe. om. Qq Ff.

[5941] _Why ... doubtless_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[5942] [Returning] Returns. Capell. om. Qq Ff.

[5943] Iago. _My lord ... honour To scan_] _My lord ... honour,_ Iag.
_To scan_ Q₁.

[5944] _further_] Qq. _farther_ Ff.

[5945] _Though it be fit_] _Tho it be fit_ Q₁. _Although 'tis fit_ Ff.
_And though tis fit_ Q₂ Q₃.

[5946] _hold_] Qq. om. F₁. _put_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

_off_] _of_ Q₃.

[5947] _his_] Ff. _her_ Qq.

[5948] [Exit.] Qq F₁. om. F₂ F₃ F₄.

[5949] SCENE VI. Pope.

[5950] _qualities_] Q₁. _quantities_ Ff Q₂ Q₃.

_learned_] Qq. _learn'd_ Ff.

[5951] _spirit, Of_] _spirit Of_ S. Walker conj.

[5952] _human_] Rowe. _humaine_ Q₁. _humane_ The rest.

_dealings_] _dealing_ Q₁.

_do_] om. Pope.

[5953] _down_] _dewne_ Q₂ Q₃.

[5954] _prey_] _pray_ Q₃.

_Haply_] Ff. _Happily_ Qq.

[5955] _vale_] _valt_ Q₁.

[5956] _abused_] _aduis'd_ Q₃.

[5957] _curse_] _the curse_ Pope.

[5958] _of_] Ff. _in_ Qq.

[5959] _corner_] _cornet_ Q₃.

_the thing_] Ff. _a thing_ Qq.

[5960] _uses_] _use_ Pope.

_plague of_] Qq. _plague to_ Ff.

_great ones_] Hyphened in Ff.

[5961] _less_] _more_ Malone conj.

[5962] _'Tis_] _This_ Q₃.

[5963] _Desdemona_] Qq. _Looke where she_ Ff.

Re-enter ...] Dyce, after _believe't,_ line 283. Enter ... Ff.
Enter ... Qq, after _beleeve it_, line 283.

[5964] _O, then heaven mocks_] _Heaven mock'd_ Ff.

[5965] _believe't_] _beleeve it_ Qq.

[5966] _islanders_] Ff. _Ilander_ Qq.

[5967] _to blame_] Qq F₄. _too blame_ F₁ F₂ F₃.

_Why ... faintly?_] Ff. _Why is your speech so faint?_ Qq.

[5968] _Why ... well?_] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

[5969] _here_] _heare_ Q₂ Q₃.

[5970] _Faith_] Q₁. _Why_ Ff Q₂ Q₃.

[5971] _it hard_] _your head_ Q₁.

[offering to bind his head. Collier (Collier MS.)

[5972] _well_] _well againe_ Q₁.

[goes to do it with a Handkerchief. Capell.

[He puts ...] Capell, substantially. She drops her Handkerchief. Rowe.
lets fall her napkine. Anon. MS. See note (IV).

[5973] Des. _I am ... well._] Omitted by Capell, but corrected in Notes.

[Exeunt ...] Ex. Oth. and Desd. Q₁ (after line 294). Exit Oth. and Des.
Q₂ Q₃ (after line 294). Exit. F₁ (after line 292). Exeunt F₂ F₃ F₄
(after line 292).

[5974] SCENE VII. Pope.

_napkin_] _napkin here_ Hanmer.

[picking it up. Capell.

[5975] _Woo'd_] Ff. _Wooed_ Qq.

[5976] _To ... not I_] Arranged as in Qq Ff. The lines end _out, ...
Iago; ... I:_ in Johnson.

[5977] _talk to_] _talke too_ F₂. _talk too_ Q (1695).

_have_] Ff. _ha_ Qq.

[5978] _I'll ... will_] _I will have the work Ta'en out, and give it to
Iago, but What he'll_ Hanmer, ending the lines _work ... but ... I._

[5979] _he will_] Ff. _hee'll_ Q₁. _he'l_ Q₂ Q₃.

[5980] _nothing but to please_] _nothing know, but for_ Q₁.

Re-enter Iago.] Dyce. Enter Iago. Ff. Enter Iago. Qq (after line 302).

[5981] _I have ... me_?] One line, S. Walker conj.

[5982] _A_] Qq. _You have a_ Ff.

_A ... thing_--] One line in Qq. Two in Ff. Steevens (1778), reading
with Ff, puts _You ... thing_--in one line.

_thing_--] Ff Q₂ Q₃. _thing_. Q₁.

[5983] _wife_] _thing_ Q₁.

[5984] _handkerchief_] _handkercher_ Q₁.

[5985] _stol'n_] _stolne_ F₁ F₂. _stoln_ F₃. _stollen_ F₄. _stole_ Qq.

[5986] _No, faith_] Qq. _No: but_ Ff.

[5987] _took 't_] Q₁ Ff. _tooke it_ Q₂ Q₃.

[5988] _it is_] Qq. _'tis_ Ff.

[5989] _What ... it?_] Divided as in Theobald. The first line ends
_bin_ in Q₁. The first ends _with it_ in Q₂ Q₃. Prose in Ff.

[5990] _with 't_] Ff. _with it_ Qq.

_that_] om. F₃ F₄. Restored by Capell.

[5991] _filch_] _fetch_ Q₃. _filtch_ F₄.

[Snatching it] Rowe. Capell, after line 317. om. Qq Ff.

_what's_] Qq. _what is_ Ff.

[5992] _If 't_] Q₂ Q₃. _If it_ Q₁ Ff.

_for_] om. Collier MS.

[5993] _Give 't me_] _Giv 't me_ Ff. _Give mee 't_ Q₁ Q₂. _Give me 't_
Q₃. _Give it me_ Steevens.

[5994] _Be ... me._] Divided as in Capell. One line in Qq. Two, the
first ending _on 't:_ in Ff.

[5995] _not acknown on 't_] F₃ F₄. _not acknowne on 't_ F₁ F₂. _not you
knowne on 't_ Q₁ Q₃. _not you acknowne on 't_ Q₂. _not you known in 't_
Johnson conj. _not you known of't_ Malone.

[5996] _lose_] Qq. _loose_ Ff.

[5997] _writ_] _Wright_ Q₃.

[5998] _The ... poison:_] Omitted in Q₁.

_poison_] _poysons_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _potion_ S. Walker conj. _practice_ S.
Walker conj. (withdrawn).

[5999] _Dangerous ... poisons,_] Omitted in Rowe (ed. 2).

_natures_] _nature_ Pope.

[6000] _act_] _art,_ Q₁.

[6001] _mines_] _mindes_ Q₁.

_I did say so:_] _Hide it!--so--so--_ Blackstone conj. (withdrawn).

[Observing Othello seemingly disturb'd. Hanmer.

[6002] SCENE VIII. Pope.

Re-enter Othello.] Dyce, after _yesterday_, line 337. Transferred by
Edd. (Globe ed.) Ent. Othello. Q₁, opposite line 332. Enter Othello.
Q₂, opposite line 332. om. Q₃. Enter Othello. Ff, after line 333. Enter
Othello, at a Distance. Capell, after line 333. Enter Othello. Knight,
after _yesterday,_ line 337.

[6003] _Nor_] om. F₄.

[6004] _owedst_] _hadst_ Pope.

Oth] Oth. [coming forward. Collier (ed. 2.)

_Ha! ha!_] _Ha!_ Pope.

_to me?_] Ff. _to me, to me?_ Qq.

[6005] _thou hast_] _thou'st_ Pope.

[6006] _know 't_] _know_ Q₁.

_now_] om. Pope.

[6007] _sense_] Q₁ F₁. _sence_ Q₂ Q₃. _sent_ F₂ F₃. _scent_ F₄.

_of her_] Qq. _in her_ Ff.

_of lust_] _or lust_ Warburton.

[6008] _saw 't_] _saw it_ F₄.

[6009] _was_] Qq. _fed well, was_ Ff.

[6010] _Pioners_] _Pyoners_ Qq F₁ F₂. _Pioneers_ F₃ F₄. _Pyoneers_ Q
(1695).

[6011] _troop_] _troope_ Qq. _troopes_ F₁ F₂. _troops_ F₃ F₄.

_wars_] _war_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[6012] _make_] F₂ F₃ F₄. _makes_ Qq F₁.

_farewell,_] _farewell;_ F₁.

[6013] _ear-piercing_] _fear-'spersing_ Warburton conj.

[6014] _you_] Ff. _ye_ Qq.

_rude_] Ff. _wide_ Qq.

[6015] _dread_] Ff. _great_ Qq.

_clamours_] _clamor_ Q₁.

[6016] _possible, my lord?_] _possible?--My lord,--_ Capell.

[6017] [Taking him by the Throat. Capell.

[6018] [Catching hold on him. Rowe.

[6019] _man's_] _mans_ Q₁. _mine_ Ff. _my_ Q₂ Q₃. _thine_ Anon. conj.

[6020] _hadst been_] _hadst_ Q (1695).

_have_] _to have_ Anon. conj.

[6021] _Than_] _That_ Q₃.

[6022] _lord,--_] _lord--_ Pope. _lord._ Qq Ff.

[6023] _horror's_] Hanmer. _horrors_ Qq Ff. _horrors'_ Anon. conj.

_horrors_] _horror_ S. Walker conj.

[6024] _For ... that._] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

[6025] _defend_] Qq. _forgive_ Ff.

[6026] _be wi'_] Rowe. _b' w'_ F₄. _buy_ The rest.

_mine_] _my_ Q₂ Q₃.

_O_] om. Pope.

[6027] _livest_] Qq. _lov'st_ Ff.

_thine_] _thy_ Q (1695).

[6028] _world! Take_] Ff. _world, take_ Qq.

[6029] _sith_] Ff. _since_ Qq.

[6030] _honest._] _honest--_ Rowe.

[6031] _loses_] F₂ F₃ F₄. _looses_ Qq F₁.

_that_] _what_ Pope.

[6032] Oth. _By ... satisfied!_ Iago.] Omitted in Q₁.

[6033] _be_] _is_ F₃ F₄.

_and_] om. Capell.

[6034] _Her_] _her_ Q₂ Q₃. _My_ Ff.

[6035] _streams_] _steams_ Pope.

[6036] _sir,_] Qq. om. Ff.

[6037] _satisfied?_] Ff. _satisfied._ Qq.

_nay, I_] Qq. _Nay, and I_ Ff. _Nay, and_ Pope.

[6038] _you, the supervisor,_] Capell. _you, the superuisor_ Q₁. _you
the supervision_ Ff. _you, the supervision_ Q₂ Q₃. _you be supervisor,_
Pope. _you them supervise?_ Seymour conj.

_the supervisor, grossly_] _the supervisor gross,_ Seymour conj.

_on?_] Ff. _on,_ Qq. _on--_ Dyce.

[6039] _topp'd_] F₂ F₃ F₄. _topt_ Qq. _top'd_ F₁. _tupp'd_ Pope (ed. 2).

[6040] _them_] F₁. _em_ Qq. om. F₂ F₃ F₄. _it_ Collier MS.

_damn them_] _dam em_ Qq.

[6041] _do_] _did_ Qq.

[6042] _how then?_] _how then, say you?_ Capell.

[6043] _What ... satisfaction?_] _Where's satisfaction? What shall I
say?_ Capell. See note (VII).

[6044] _prime_] _brime_ or _brim_ Singer conj.

[6045] _may_] Qq. _might_ Ff.

_have't_] Ff. _ha't_ Qq.

[6046] _she's_] Ff. _that she's_ Qq.

[6047] _sith_] _since_ Theobald (ed. 2).

_in_] Ff. _into_ Qq.

[6048] _on_] _one_ Q₃.

[6049] _And ... Cassio:_] Arranged as by Pope. Four lines ending
_sleep, ... soule, ... affaires, ... Cassio:_ in Qq. Four lines, ending
_tooth, ... men, ... mutter ... Cassio:_ in Ff.

[6050] _sleeps_] _sleep_ Q (1695).

_their_] _All their_ Hanmer, arranging as Ff. Of their Capell. _Their
dear'st_ Seymour conj. _Their near'st_ Anon. conj.

[6051] _wary_] _merry_ Q₁.

[6052] _Cry 'O_] _Cry, oh_ Ff. _Cry out_, Qq.

_and_] Qq. om. Ff.

[6053] _That ... Moor_!] Divided as in Qq. The lines end _thigh, ...
Fate, ... Moore_ in Ff.

[6054] _then laid_] _then layed_ Q₁ Q₂. _then laied_ Q₃. _laid_ Ff.
_lay_ Rowe. _then lay_ Pope, dividing as Qq.

[6055] _Over ... sigh'd ... kiss'd ... Cried_] Capell. _Over ...
sigh'd ... kissed ... Cried_ Qq. _ore ... sigh ... kisse ... cry_ Ff.
_Over ... sigh ... kiss ... Cry_ Pope.

[6056] _Nay,_] om. Pope.

[6057] _denoted_] _deuoted_ Q₁.

[6058] _'Tis ... dream._ Iago. _And_] Iag. _Tis ... dreame, And_ Q₁.

[6059] _but_] Qq. _yet_ Ff.

[6060] _handkerchief_] _handkercher_ Q₁.

[6061] _wife's_] Rowe. _wives_ Qq Ff.

[6062] _hand_?] Ff Q₂. _hand._ Q₁. _hand,_ Q₃.

[6063] _If it_] Ff. _If't_ Qq.

_that,--_] _that--_ Rowe. _that._ Qq Ff.

[6064] _any that was hers,_] Malone. _any, it was hers,_ Qq. _any, it
was hers._ F₁. _any, if't was hers,_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _any 'it' was hers,_
Anon. conj.

[6065] _do I_] _I doe_ Q₂ Q₃.

_true_] _time_ Q₁.

[6066] _'Tis gone_] As a separate line in Pope. Ending line 449 in Qq
Ff. om. Seymour conj.

[6067] _thy hollow cell_] Qq. _the hollow hell_ Ff. _th' unhallow'd
cell_ Warburton.

[6068] _hearted_] _harted_ Q₁. _parted_ Warburton.

[6069] [he kneeles. Q₁, opposite _content._ Opposite _tongues,_ in Q₂
Q₃. Omitted in Ff.

_Yet_] Ff. _Pray_ Qq.

[6070] _blood, blood, blood_] Ff. _blood, Iago, blood_ Qq.

[6071] _perhaps_] Qq. om. Ff.

[6072] _Iago ... heaven,_] Omitted in Q₁.

[6073] _Never ... sea,_] One line in Ff. Two in Q₂ Q₃.

_to_] om. Pope.

[6074] _icy_] _yesty_ Singer (ed. 2).

[6075] _Ne'er feels_] _Ne'r feels_ Q₂ Q₃. _Nev'r keepes_ F₁ F₂. _Ne're
keeps_ F₃ F₄. _Ne'er makes_ Keightley. _Nev'r knows_ Southern MS. and
Collier MS. _Ne'er knows_ Grant White. _Ne'er brooks_ S. Walker conj.

[6076] _ne'er ... ne'er_] _nev'r ... nev'r_ F₁ F₂. _ne're ... ne're_
The rest.

[6077] _by_] _be_ Q₃.

[6078] _of_] _to_ Q₃.

[Kneels.] Rowe. om. Qq Ff. Othello kneeles. Anon. MS. See note (IV).

[6079] _words._] Qq. _words_--Ff.

[Kneels.] Iago kneels. Q₂. Iago kneeles. Q₁, opposite line 468. Omitted
in Ff Q₃.

[6080] _you_] _the_ Q₂ Q₃. _your_ F₄. _ye_ Johnson.

[6081] _You_] _Ye_ Johnson.

[6082] _execution_] _excellency_ Q₁.

_hands_] Ff. _hand_ Qq.

[6083] _And to obey_] _Not to obey_ Pope. _Nor, to obey_ Theobald. _And
not to obey_ Jennens. _An' to obey_ Farmer conj.

_be in me remorse_] _be remorce_ Q₁. _be in me no remorse_ Capell
(Upton conj.) _bury my remorse_ or _breed me no remorse_ Anon. conj.
_without remorce_ Anon. MS. See note (IV).

[6084] _in me remorse, What_] _in me. Remord What_ Warburton.

[6085] _business ever_] _worke so ever_ Qq. _work soe'er_ Collier.

[They rise.] Rising. Capell. om. Qq Ff.

[6086] _My ... live._] Divided as in Capell. Two lines, the first
ending _dead:_ in Qq. Three, ending _dead: ... request ... live,_ in Ff.

[6087] _at your request_] Ff. _as you request_ Qq.

[6088] _Damn ... her_!] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_her_!] _her_, Qq. _her, damne her._ Ff.

[6089] _For ... lieutenant._] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[6090] SCENE IV.] SCENE IX. Pope. Rowe continues the Scene.

Before the castle.] The same. Capell. Another Apartment in the Palace.
Theobald.

Desdemona, Emilia,] Desdemonia, Emilla Qq.

Clown.] the Clowne. Qq.

[6091] _Lieutenant_] _the Leiutenant_ Qq.

[6092] Clo.] om. Q₁.

_He's_] Ff. _He is._ Qq.

_one_] Qq. _mee_ F₁ F₂. _me_ F₃ F₄.

_is_] Qq. _'tis_ Ff.

[6093] _to_] _too_ F₁.

[6094] Clo. _To ... this_?] Omitted in Q₁.

[6095] _lies ... there_] _lies there_ Qq.

[6096] _mine own_] _my_ Q₁. _my own_ Capell.

[6097] _be_] om. Q₃.

_by_] _to_ Collier MS.

[6098] _by them_] _make them_ Q₃. _bid them_ Theobald (Warburton).

[6099] _on his_] Ff. _in his_ Qq.

[6100] _man's wit_] _a man_ Q₁.

[6101] _I will_] _I'le_ Q₁. _Ile_ Q₂ Q₃.

_it_] Ff. _of it_ Qq.

[Exit.] Qq. Exit Clo. F₁ F₂ F₃. Exit Clown. F₄.

[6102] _lose_] Q (1695) and Rowe. _loose_ Qq Ff.

_that_] Qq. _the_ Ff.

_handkerchief_] _handkercher_ Q₁.

[6103] _have lost_] Ff. _loose_ Qq. _lose_ Q (1695).

[6104] _jealous_] _iealious_ F₁. _jealious_ F₂.

[6105] _I will ... him._] Divided as by Steevens (1793). The first line
ends at _now_ in Qq, at _be_ in Ff. Prose in Malone.

[6106] _till_] _Let_ Q₁.

Enter Othello.] As in Dyce. After _him,_ line 28, in Qq. After _comes,_
line 28, in F₁ F₂. After _sorrow,_ line 34, in F₃. After _lord?_ line
30, in F₄.

[6107] _is't_] Ff. _is it_ Qq.

SCENE X. Pope.

[6108] [Aside] Hanmer.

[6109] Des.] Les. F₂.

_good_] om. Pope.

[6110] _Give ... lady._] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[6111] _yet has_] Qq. _hath_ Ff. _yet hath_ Rowe.

[6112] _Hot, hot_] _Not hot_ Q₁ _Both hot_ Anon. MS. See note (IV).

[6113] _prayer_] Ff. _praying_ Qq.

[6114] _devout_] _devoted_ Q₃.

[6115] _young_] _strong_ Warburton.

_sweating_] _sweatie_ Q₃.

[6116] _frank one_] _frank one too_ Capell. _very frank one_ Hanmer.

[6117] _hearts ... hands_] _hands ... hearts_ Hanmer (Warburton).

[6118] _I cannot ... promise._] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_Come now,_] _Come now_ Q₂ Q₃. _Come, now_ Ff. _Come, come_ Q₁.

[6119] _sorry_] Ff. _sullen_ Qq. _sudden_ Collier MS.

[6120] _handkerchief_] _handkercher_ Q₁.

[6121] _Not?_] Ff. _Not._ Qq.

[6122] _indeed_] _faith_ Q₁.

[6123] _That's_] Qq Ff. _That is_ Capell.

_That's ... handkerchief_ One line in Qq Ff. Two, the first ending
_fault,_ in Steevens (1793), reading _That is._

[6124] _and_] om. F₂ F₃ F₄.

[6125] _Entirely ... it,_] Repeated in Q₁.

[6126] _loathed_] _lothely_ Q₁.

_his_] _her_ Jennens (a misprint).

_spirits_] _spirit_ Q (1695).

_should_] om. Pope.

[6127] _wive_] Qq. _wiv'd_ Ff.

[6128] _lose't_] Theobald. _loose't_ F₁ F₂. _loos't_ F₃ F₄. _loose_ Q₁
Q₂. _lose_ Q₃.

_perdition_] _prediction_ Q₃.

[6129] _had_] _hath_ Hanmer (ed. 2).

[6130] _The sun to course_] Ff Q₂ Q₃. _The sun to make_ Q₁. _Of the
sun's course_ Hanmer.

[6131] _sew'd_] _sow'd_ Ff. _sowed_ Qq.

[6132] _hallow'd_] Capell. _hallowed_ Q₁ Ff Q₂. _hollowed_ Q₃.

[6133] _which_] _with_ Q₁ Q₃.

[6134] _Conserved_] _Conserues_ Q₁. _Concerue_ Q₂. _Conserve_ Q₃.

_Indeed_] _Ifaith_ Q₁.

[6135] _to God_] Qq. _to heaven_ F₁. _the heaven_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

_seen't_] F₃ F₄. _seene't_ F₁ F₂. _seene it_ Qq.

[6136] _startingly_] _staringly_ F₃ F₄.

_rash_] _rashly_ Q₁.

[6137] _is it_] Qq. _is't_ Ff.

[6138] _Heaven_] Q₁. om. Ff Q₂ Q₃.

[6139] _an if_] Theobald (ed. 2). _and if_ Qq Ff.

[6140] _How!_] _How?_ Ff. _Ha._ Qq.

[6141] _Fetch't_] Qq F₄. _Fecht_ F₁ F₂ _Fetcht'_ F₃.

_see it_] Qq. _see't_ Ff.

[6142] _sir,_] Qq. om. Ff.

[6143] _Pray you_] Ff. _I pray_ Qq.

[6144] _Fetch ... misgives._] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_the_] Ff. _that_ Qq.

[6145] _handkerchief_] _handkercher_ Q₁.

[6146] _misgives._] _misgives--_ Rowe. _misgives me--_ Keightley.

[6147] _Come ... man._] Divided as in Capell. One line in Qq. Prose in
Ff.

_Come ... never_] _Come, you'll ne'er_ Pope.

[6148] _man_] _m_ Q₁ (Cap.)

[6149] Des. _I pray ... handkerchief!_] Des. _I pray ... handkercher._
Q₁. Omitted in the rest.

[6150] _his_] om. Q₃.

[6151] _Shared ... jealous?_] Two lines, the first ending _sooth_, in
Steevens (1793).

[6152] _you,--_] _you--_ Steevens. _you:_ Capell. _you._ Qq Ff.

[6153] _In sooth_] _Ifaith_ Q₁.

_to blame_] Q₃ F₄. _too blame_ The rest.

[6154] _Away_] _Zouns_ Q₁.

[Exit.] Qq. Exit Othello. Ff.

[6155] SCENE XI. Manent Desdemona and Æmilia. Pope.

_jealous_] _iealious_ F₁. _jealious_ F₂.

[6156] _Sure_] _Sir_ Q₃.

[6157] _I am_] _I'm_ Pope.

_the loss of it_] _this losse_ Q₁ (Cap.) _the losse_ Q₁ (Dev. and Chip.)

[6158] _are all_] _are_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[6159] _they are_] _they're_ Pope.

[6160] _They ... husband._] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

Enter ...] Dyce. Enter Iago and Cassio. Pope. Enter Iago, and Cassio.
Ff (after _us_). Enter Iago and Cassio. Qq (after line 103).

[6161] _do't_] F₃ F₄. _doo't_ F₁ F₂. _doe it_ Qq.

[6162] _may again_] _doe beseech you:_ Q₃.

[6163] _office_] _duty_ Q₁.

[6164] _delay'd_] _delayed_ Q₁ Q₂.

[6165] _nor my_] F₁. _not my_ Q₂ F₂ Q₃ F₃ F₄. _neither_ Q₁.

_sorrows_] _sorrow_ S. Walker conj.

[6166] _shut ... in_] _shoote my selfe up in_ Q₁. _shoot myself upon_
Capell. _shape myself upon_ Anon. apud Rann conj. _set myself upon_
Collier conj. _shift myself upon_ Collier MS. _suit myself up in_ Anon.
conj. _shoote my selfe forth in_ Anon. MS. See note (IV).

_shut ... other course_] _suit ... order coarse_ Jackson conj.

[6167] _alms_] _arms_ Pope.

_thrice-gentle_] _thrice gentile_ Q₃.

[6168] _stood_] _stoop_ Q₃.

[6169] _can he be_] Qq. _is he_ Ff.

[6170] SCENE XII. Pope.

[Exit Iago.] As in Capell. Exit. Ff (after line 140). Omitted in Qq.

[6171] _or some_] _of some_ Johnson.

[6172] _demonstrable here_] _here demonstrable_ Pope.

[6173] _puddled_] _pulld_ Q₃.

[6174] _Though ... gods,_] Arranged As in Ff. Five lines, ending
_object, ... ake, ... members, ... thinke, ... gods,_ in Qq.

[6175] _Though_] Ff. _Tho_ Q₁ Q₂. _The_ Q₃.

_their_] Ff. _the_ Qq.

[6176] _indues_] _endures_ Q₃. _subdues_ Johnson conj. _inducts_
Jackson conj.

[6177] _even to that sense_] Qq. _even to a sense_ Ff. _with a sense_
Pope. _even with that sense_ Seymour conj.

[6178] _Nor_] _Not_ Q₃.

_observancy_] _observancie_ F₁. _observances_ Qq. _observance_ F₂ F₃
F₄. _observance always_ Rowe.

[6179] _warrior_] _wrangler_ Hanmer. _lawyer_ Becket conj.

[6180] _indicted_] Collier. _indited_ Qq Ff.

[6181] _Pray ... you._] Divided as in Qq. The lines end _be ...
conception, ... you_ in Ff.

[6182] _state-matters_] _State-matter_ Pope, divided with Ff.

[6183] _nor no_] _Nor_ Rowe.

[6184] _jealous_] _Iealious_ F₁ F₂.

[6185] _jealous_] _iealious_ F₁.

_the cause_] _a cause_ Pope.

[6186] _jealous_] _iealious_ F₁. jealious F₂.

[6187] _they are_] Qq. _they're_ Ff.

_'tis_] _tis_ Qq. _It is_ Ff. _It's_ Pope.

[6188] _upon_] _unto_ Q₃.

_on_] _of_ Seymour conj.

[6189] _that_] Qq. _the_ Ff.

_Othello's_] _Othell's_ F₂.

[6190] _hereabout_] F₃ F₄. _here about_ Qq. _heere about_ F₁ F₂.

[6191] _uttermost_] _utmost_ Q₃.

[6192] [Exeunt ...] As in Pope. Opposite lines 167, 168 in Qq. Exit Ff
(after line 168). Ex. Desdem. and Æmil. at one door; Cassio, at the
other. Theobald.

SCENE XIII. Pope. Scene changes to the Street before the Palace.
Theobald.

Enter Bianca.] As in Ff Q₂ Q₃. After _Cassio!_ line 170, in Q₁.
Re-enter Cassio, meeting Bianca. Theobald.

[6193] _make_] _makes_ F₄.

[6194] _is it_] Qq. _is't_ Ff.

[6195] _I'faith_] _Ifaith_ Q₁. _Indeed_ The rest.

_coming_] _going_ Q₃.

_house_] _lodging_ Capell.

[6196] _lovers'_] _lovers_ Qq F₁. _loves_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _lover's_ Pope.

[6197] _O_] _No_ Q₁.

[6198] _leaden_] _laden_ Q₁.

[6199] _continuate time_] Ff Q₂. _convenient time_ Q₁. _continuate: of
time_ Q₃.

[6200] [Giving....] Rowe. om. Qq Ff.

[6201] _O_] om. Hanmer.

[6202] _friend: ... now_] _friend; To the felt-absence, now_ Rowe.
_friend, To the felt absence, now_ Q₁. _friend To the felt absence,
now_ Q₂ Q₃. _friend, To the felt-absence: now_ Ff. _friend: Of thy felt
absence, now_ Pope.

[6203] _Well, well._] Omitted in Q₁. _Well, well, well--_ Keightley.

_Go to, woman!_] _Well, go to, woman;_ Hanmer. _Woman, go to!_ Capell.

[6204] _vile_] Qq. _vilde_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _vild_ F₄.

[6205] _by my faith_] Q₁. _in good troth_ The rest. _in good truth_
Johnson.

_whose_] _who's_ Q₁ F₁ F₂.

[6206] _I know ... chamber._] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_sweet_] Qq. _neither_ Ff.

[6207] _I'ld_] _I'de_ Qq. _I would_ Ff.

[6208] Bian. _Why ... not._] Omitted in Q₁.

[6209] _But ... me._] _Not that you love me._ Hanmer.

[6210] _night._] Qq. _night?_ Ff.

[6211] [Exeunt.] Qq. Exeunt omnes. Ff.




ACT IV.


SCENE I. _Cyprus. Before the castle._

                   _Enter_ OTHELLO _and_ IAGO.[6212]

    _Iago._ Will you think so?

    _Oth._                     Think so, Iago![6213]

    _Iago._                                    What,[6214]
    To kiss in private?[6214]

    _Oth._               An unauthorized kiss.[6215]

    _Iago._ Or to be naked with her friend in bed[6216][6217]
    An hour or more, not meaning any harm?

    _Oth._ Naked in bed, Iago, and not mean harm![6217]                5
    It is hypocrisy against the devil:
    They that mean virtuously and yet do so,
    The devil their virtue tempts and they tempt heaven.[6218]

    _Iago._ So they do nothing, 'tis a venial slip:[6219]
    But if I give my wife a handkerchief--[6220][6221]                10

    _Oth._ What then?

    _Iago._ Why, then, 'tis hers, my lord; and being hers,[6222]
    She may, I think, bestow 't on any man.

    _Oth._ She is protectress of her honour too:[6223]
    May she give that?                                                15

    _Iago._ Her honour is an essence that's not seen;
    They have it very oft that have it not:
    But for the handkerchief--[6221]

    _Oth._ By heaven, I would most gladly have forgot it:
    Thou said'st--O, it comes o'er my memory,                         20
    As doth the raven o'er the infected house,[6224]
    Boding to all--he had my handkerchief.[6225]

    _Iago._ Ay, what of that?

    _Oth._                    That's not so good now.

    _Iago._                                           What,[6226]
    If I had said I had seen him do you wrong?[6226][6227]
    Or heard him say--as knaves be such abroad,[6228]                 25
    Who having, by their own importunate suit,
    Or voluntary dotage of some mistress,[6229]
    Convinced or supplied them, cannot choose[6230]
    But they must blab--[6231]

    _Oth._               Hath he said any thing?

    _Iago._ He hath, my lord; but be you well assured,                30
    No more than he'll unswear.

    _Oth._                      What hath he said?

    _Iago._ Faith, that he did--I know not what he did.[6232]

    _Oth._ What? what?[6233]

    _Iago._ Lie--

    _Oth._        With her?

    _Iago._                 With her, on her; what you will.[6234]

    _Oth._ Lie with her! lie on her!--We say lie on her, when[6235]   35
    they belie her.--Lie with her! 'Zounds, that's fulsome![6235][6236]
    Handkerchief--confessions--handkerchief!--To confess, and[6237][6238][6239]
    be hanged for his labour; first, to be hanged, and then to[6238][6239]
    confess. I tremble at it. Nature would not invest herself in[6238][6239]
    such shadowing passion without some instruction. It is not[6239][6240]  40
    words that shakes me thus. Pish! Noses, ears and lips.[6239][6241]
    Is't possible?--Confess?--Handkerchief?--O devil!

                                      [_Falls in a trance._[6239][6242]

    _Iago._ Work on,[6243]
    My medicine, work! Thus credulous fools are caught;[6243][6244]
    And many worthy and chaste dames even thus,[6243]                 45
    All guiltless, meet reproach. What, ho! my lord![6243]
    My lord, I say! Othello![6243][6245]

                            _Enter_ CASSIO.

                             How now, Cassio!

    _Cas._ What's the matter?

    _Iago._ My lord is fall'n into an epilepsy:[6246]
    This is his second fit; he had one yesterday.[6247]               50

    _Cas._ Rub him about the temples.

    _Iago._                           No, forbear;[6248]
    The lethargy must have his quiet course:[6249]
    If not, he foams at mouth, and by and by
    Breaks out to savage madness. Look, he stirs:[6250]
    Do you withdraw yourself a little while,                          55
    He will recover straight: when he is gone,
    I would on great occasion speak with you.      [_Exit Cassio._[6251]
    How is it, general? have you not hurt your head?[6252]

    _Oth._ Dost thou mock me?

    _Iago._                   I mock you! no, by heaven.[6253]
    Would you would bear your fortune like a man![6254]               60

    _Oth._ A horned man's a monster and a beast.

    _Iago._ There's many a beast then in a populous city,
    And many a civil monster.

    _Oth._ Did he confess it?

    _Iago._                   Good sir, be a man;[6255]
    Think every bearded fellow that's but yoked[6256]                 65
    May draw with you: there's millions now alive[6257]
    That nightly lie in those unproper beds[6258]
    Which they dare swear peculiar: your case is better.[6259]
    O, 'tis the spite of hell, the fiend's arch-mock,[6260]
    To lip a wanton in a secure couch,                                70
    And to suppose her chaste! No, let me know;[6261][6262]
    And knowing what I am, I know what she shall be.[6261][6263]

    _Oth._ O, thou art wise; 'tis certain.[6261]

    _Iago._                          Stand you awhile apart;[6261][6264]
    Confine yourself but in a patient list.
    Whilst you were here o'erwhelmed with your grief--[6265]          75
    A passion most unsuiting such a man--[6266]
    Cassio came hither: I shifted him away,
    And laid good 'scuse upon your ecstasy;[6267]
    Bade him anon return and here speak with me;[6268]
    The which he promised. Do but encave yourself,[6269]              80
    And mark the fleers, the gibes and notable scorns,[6270]
    That dwell in every region of his face;
    For I will make him tell the tale anew,
    Where, how, how oft, how long ago and when
    He hath and is again to cope your wife:[6271]                     85
    I say, but mark his gesture. Marry, patience;
    Or I shall say you are all in all in spleen,[6272]
    And nothing of a man.

    _Oth._                Dost thou hear, Iago?[6273]
    I will be found most cunning in my patience;[6274]
    But--dost thou hear?--most bloody.

    _Iago._                            That's not amiss;[6275]        90
    But yet keep time in all. Will you withdraw?

                                              [_Othello retires._[6276]

    Now will I question Cassio of Bianca,
    A housewife that by selling her desires
    Buys herself bread and clothes: it is a creature[6277]
    That dotes on Cassio; as 'tis the strumpet's plague               95
    To beguile many and be beguiled by one.
    He, when he hears of her, cannot refrain[6278]
    From the excess of laughter. Here he comes.

                        _Re-enter_ CASSIO.[6279]

    As he shall smile, Othello shall go mad;[6280]
    And his unbookish jealousy must construe[6281]                   100
    Poor Cassio's smiles, gestures and light behaviour,[6282]
    Quite in the wrong. How do you now, lieutenant?[6283]

    _Cas._ The worser that you give me the addition[6284]
    Whose want even kills me.

    _Iago._ Ply Desdemona well, and you are sure on 't.              105
    Now, if this suit lay in Bianca's power,[6285]
    How quickly should you speed!

    _Cas._                        Alas, poor caitiff![6286]

    _Oth._ Look, how he laughs already![6287]

    _Iago._ I never knew a woman love man so.[6288]

    _Cas._ Alas, poor rogue! I think, i' faith, she loves me.[6289]  110

    _Oth._ Now he denies it faintly and laughs it out.[6287][6290]

    _Iago._ Do you hear, Cassio?

    _Oth._                       Now he importunes him[6287][6291]
    To tell it o'er: go to; well said, well said.[6292]

    _Iago._ She gives it out that you shall marry her:
    Do you intend it?                                                115

    _Cas._ Ha, ha, ha!

    _Oth._ Do you triumph, Roman? do you triumph?[6287][6293]

    _Cas._ I marry her! what, a customer! I prithee, bear[6294][6295]
    some charity to my wit; do not think it so unwholesome.[6294]
    Ha, ha, ha![6294]                                                120

    _Oth._ So, so, so, so: they laugh that win.[6287][6296]

    _Iago._ Faith, the cry goes that you shall marry her.[6297]

    _Cas._ Prithee, say true.

    _Iago._ I am a very villain else.[6298]

    _Oth._ Have you scored me? Well.[6287][6299]                     125

    _Cas._ This is the monkey's own giving out: she is persuaded[6300]
    I will marry her, out of her own love and flattery,[6300]
    not out of my promise.[6300]

    _Oth._ Iago beckons me; now he begins the story.[6287][6301]

    _Cas._ She was here even now; she haunts me in every             130
    place. I was the other day talking on the sea-bank with[6302]
    certain Venetians; and thither comes the bauble, and, by[6303][6304]
    this hand, she falls me thus about my neck--[6304][6305]

    _Oth._ Crying 'O dear Cassio!' as it were: his gesture[6287][6306]
    imports it.                                                      135

    _Cas._ So hangs and lolls and weeps upon me; so hales[6307][6308]
    and pulls me: ha, ha, ha![6307]

    _Oth._ Now he tells how she plucked him to my[6287][6309]
    chamber. O, I see that nose of yours, but not that dog I[6309][6310]
    shall throw it to.[6309][6311]                                   140

    _Cas._ Well, I must leave her company.

    _Iago._ Before me! look, where she comes.[6312]

    _Cas._ Tis such another fitchew! marry, a perfumed one.

                         _Enter_ BIANCA.[6313]

    What do you mean by this haunting of me?

    _Bian._ Let the devil and his dam haunt you! What did            145
    you mean by that same handkerchief you gave me even[6314]
    now? I was a fine fool to take it. I must take out the work?[6315]
    A likely piece of work, that you should find it in your
    chamber, and not know who left it there! This is some[6316]
    minx's token, and I must take out the work? There; give          150
    it your hobby-horse: wheresoever you had it, I'll take out[6317]
    no work on't.[6318]

    _Cas._ How now, my sweet Bianca! how now! how now![6319]

    _Oth._ By heaven, that should be my handkerchief![6287][6314]

    _Bian._ An you'll come to supper to-night, you may; an[6320]     155
    you will not, come when you are next prepared for.          [_Exit._

    _Iago._ After her, after her.

    _Cas._ Faith, I must; she'll rail i' the street else.[6321]

    _Iago._ Will you sup there?[6322]

    _Cas._ Faith, I intend so.[6323]                                 160

    _Iago._ Well, I may chance to see you; for I would very
    fain speak with you.

    _Cas._ Prithee, come; will you?

    _Iago._ Go to; say no more.                    [_Exit Cassio._[6324]

    _Oth._ [_Advancing_] How shall I murder him, Iago?[6325]         165

    _Iago._ Did you perceive how he laughed at his vice?

    _Oth._ O Iago![6326]

    _Iago._ And did you see the handkerchief?[6314]

    _Oth._ Was that mine?

    _Iago._ Yours, by this hand: and to see how he prizes the[6327]  170
    foolish woman your wife! she gave it him, and he hath given[6327]
    it his whore.[6327]

    _Oth._ I would have him nine years a-killing. A fine[6327][6328]
    woman! a fair woman! a sweet woman![6328]

    _Iago._ Nay, you must forget that.[6329]                         175

    _Oth._ Ay, let her rot, and perish, and be damned to-night;[6330]
    for she shall not live: no, my heart is turned to stone; I[6331]
    strike it, and it hurts my hand. O, the world hath not a[6332]
    sweeter creature: she might lie by an emperor's side, and
    command him tasks.                                               180

    _Iago._ Nay, that's not your way.

    _Oth._ Hang her! I do but say what she is: so delicate[6333]
    with her needle: an admirable musician: O, she will sing
    the savageness out of a bear: of so high and plenteous wit[6334]
    and invention:--[6335]                                           185

    _Iago._ She's the worse for all this.

    _Oth._ O, a thousand thousand times: and then, of so[6336][6337][6338]
    gentle a condition![6337][6339]

    _Iago._ Ay, too gentle.

    _Oth._ Nay, that's certain: but yet the pity of it, Iago![6340]  190
    O Iago, the pity of it, Iago![6341]

    _Iago._ If you are so fond over her iniquity, give her patent[6342]
    to offend; for, if it touch not you, it comes near nobody.[6343]

    _Oth._ I will chop her into messes: cuckold me!

    _Iago._ O, 'tis foul in her.                                     195

    _Oth._ With mine officer!

    _Iago._ That's fouler.

    _Oth._ Get me some poison, Iago; this night. I'll not[6344]
    expostulate with her, lest her body and beauty unprovide[6345]
    my mind again: this night, Iago.                                 200

    _Iago._ Do it not with poison, strangle her in her bed,[6346]
    even the bed she hath contaminated.[6347]

    _Oth._ Good, good: the justice of it pleases: very good.[6348]

    _Iago._ And for Cassio, let me be his undertaker: you[6349]
    shall hear more by midnight.[6349]                               205

    _Oth._ Excellent good.  [_A trumpet within._]  What
            trumpet is that same?[6350]

    _Iago._ Something from Venice, sure. 'Tis Lodovico[6351][6352]
    Come from the duke: and, see, your wife is with him.[6351]

          _Enter_ LODOVICO, DESDEMONA, _and_ Attendants.[6353]

    _Lod._ God save the worthy general!

    _Oth._                              With all my heart, sir.[6354]

    _Lod._ The duke and senators of Venice greet you.                210

                                            [_Gives him a letter._[6355]

    _Oth._ I kiss the instrument of their pleasures.

                                   [_Opens the letter, and reads._[6356]

    _Des._ And what's the news, good cousin Lodovico?

    _Iago._ I am very glad to see you, signior;[6357][6358]
    Welcome to Cyprus.[6357]

    _Lod._ I thank you. How does Lieutenant Cassio?[6359]            215

    _Iago._ Lives, sir.

    _Des._ Cousin, there's fall'n between him and my lord
    An unkind breach: but you shall make all well.

    _Oth._ Are you sure of that?

    _Des._ My lord?[6360]                                            220

    _Oth._ [_Reads_] 'This fail you not to do, as you will--'[6361]

    _Lod._ He did not call; he's busy in the paper.
    Is there division 'twixt my lord and Cassio?[6362]

    _Des._ A most unhappy one: I would do much
    To atone them, for the love I bear to Cassio.[6363]              225

    _Oth._ Fire and brimstone!

    _Des._ My lord?[6360]

    _Oth._ Are you wise?

    _Des._ What, is he angry?

    _Lod._                    May be the letter moved him;
    For, as I think, they do command him home,                       230
    Deputing Cassio in his government.

    _Des._ By my troth, I am glad on 't.[6364]

    _Oth._                               Indeed!

    _Des._                                       My lord?[6360]

    _Oth._ I am glad to see you mad.

    _Des._                           Why, sweet Othello?[6365]

    _Oth._ Devil!                                 [_Striking her._[6366]

    _Des._ I have not deserved this.                                 235

    _Lod._ My lord, this would not be believed in Venice,
    Though I should swear I saw 't: 'tis very much:
    Make her amends; she weeps.

    _Oth._                      O devil, devil!
    If that the earth could teem with woman's tears,[6367]
    Each drop she falls would prove a crocodile.                     240
    Out of my sight!

    _Des._           I will not stay to offend you.      [_Going._[6368]

    _Lod._ Truly, an obedient lady:[6369]
    I do beseech your lordship, call her back.

    _Oth._ Mistress!

    _Des._ My lord?                                                  245

    _Oth._ What would you with her, sir?

    _Lod._                               Who, I, my lord?

    _Oth._ Ay; you did wish that I would make her turn:
    Sir, she can turn and turn, and yet go on,
    And turn again; and she can weep, sir, weep;
    And she's obedient, as you say, obedient,[6370]                  250
    Very obedient. Proceed you in your tears.[6371]
    Concerning this, sir,--O well-painted passion!--
    I am commanded home. Get you away;[6372]
    I'll send for you anon. Sir, I obey the mandate,
    And will return to Venice. Hence, avaunt!                        255

                                                [_Exit Desdemona._[6373]

    Cassio shall have my place. And, sir, to-night,
    I do entreat that we may sup together:
    You are welcome, sir, to Cyprus. Goats and monkeys![6374]

                                                                [_Exit._

    _Lod._ Is this the noble Moor whom our full senate[6375]
    Call all in all sufficient? This the nature[6376]                260
    Whom passion could not shake? whose solid virtue[6377]
    The shot of accident nor dart of chance[6378]
    Could neither graze nor pierce?[6379]

    _Iago._                         He is much changed.

    _Lod._ Are his wits safe? is he not light of brain?[6380]

    _Iago._ He's that he is: I may not breathe my censure[6381][6382]  265
    What he might be: if what he might he is not,[6382][6383]
    I would to heaven he were!

    _Lod._                     What, strike his wife!

    _Iago._ Faith, that was not so well; yet would I knew
    That stroke would prove the worst!

    _Lod._                             Is it his use?[6384]
    Or did the letters work upon his blood,                          270
    And new create this fault?[6385]

    _Iago._                    Alas, alas!
    It is not honesty in me to speak
    What I have seen and known. You shall observe him,[6386]
    And his own courses will denote him so
    That I may save my speech: do but go after,[6387]                275
    And mark how he continues.

    _Lod._ I am sorry that I am deceived in him.        [_Exeunt._[6388]


SCENE II. _A room in the castle._[6389]

                     _Enter_ OTHELLO _and_ EMILIA.

    _Oth._ You have seen nothing, then?[6390][6391]

    _Emil._ Nor ever heard, nor ever did suspect.[6390]

    _Oth._ Yes, you have seen Cassio and she together.[6390][6392]

    _Emil._ But then I saw no harm, and then I heard
    Each syllable that breath made up between them.[6393]              5

    _Oth._ What, did they never whisper?

    _Emil._                              Never, my lord.

    _Oth._ Nor send you out o' the way?[6394]

    _Emil._ Never.[6395]

    _Oth._ To fetch her fan, her gloves, her mask, nor nothing?[6396]

    _Emil._ Never, my lord.                                           10

    _Oth._ That's strange.

    _Emil._ I durst, my lord, to wager she is honest,
    Lay down my soul at stake: if you think other,
    Remove your thought; it doth abuse your bosom.
    If any wretch have put this in your head,[6397]                   15
    Let heaven requite it with the serpent's curse![6398]
    For if she be not honest, chaste and true,
    There's no man happy; the purest of their wives[6399]
    Is foul as slander.

    _Oth._              Bid her come hither: go.   [_Exit Emilia._[6400]
    She says enough: yet she's a simple bawd                          20
    That cannot say as much. This is a subtle whore,[6401]
    A closet lock and key of villanous secrets:[6402]
    And yet she'll kneel and pray; I have seen her do't.

                 _Enter_ DESDEMONA _with_ EMILIA.[6403]

    _Des._ My lord, what is your will?

    _Oth._                             Pray, chuck, come hither.[6404]

    _Des._ What is your pleasure?

    _Oth._                        Let me see your eyes;[6405]         25
    Look in my face.[6405]

    _Des._           What horrible fancy's this?

    _Oth._ [_To Emilia_] Some of your function, mistress;[6406]
    Leave procreants alone and shut the door;
    Cough, or cry hem, if any body come:
    Your mystery, your mystery: nay, dispatch. [_Exit Emilia._[6407]  30

    _Des._ Upon my knees, what doth your speech import?[6408]
    I understand a fury in your words,
    But not the words.[6409][6410]

    _Oth._ Why, what art thou?[6410]

    _Des._ Your wife, my lord; your true and loyal wife.[6410]        35

    _Oth._ Come, swear it, damn thyself;[6410][6411]
    Lest, being like one of heaven, the devils themselves[6411][6412]
    Should fear to seize thee: therefore be double-damn'd;[6411][6413]
    Swear thou art honest.[6411]

    _Des._                 Heaven doth truly know it.

    _Oth._ Heaven truly knows that thou art false as hell.[6414]      40

    _Des._ To whom, my lord? with whom? how am I false?[6415]

    _Oth._ O Desdemona! Away! away! away![6416]

    _Des._ Alas the heavy day! Why do you weep?[6417]
    Am I the motive of these tears, my lord?[6418]
    If haply you my father do suspect[6419]                           45
    An instrument of this your calling back,
    Lay not your blame on me: if you have lost him,[6420][6421]
    Why, I have lost him too.[6421]

    _Oth._                    Had it pleased heaven[6422]
    To try me with affliction; had they rain'd[6423]
    All kinds of sores and shames on my bare head,[6424]              50
    Steep'd me in poverty to the very lips,
    Given to captivity me and my utmost hopes,[6425]
    I should have found in some place of my soul[6426]
    A drop of patience: but, alas, to make me[6427]
    A fixed figure for the time of scorn[6428]                        55
    To point his slow unmoving finger at![6428]
    Yet could I bear that too; well, very well:
    But there, where I have garner'd up my heart,
    Where either I must live or bear no life,
    The fountain from the which my current runs,[6429]                60
    Or else dries up; to be discarded thence!
    Or keep it as a cistern for foul toads[6430]
    To knot and gender in! Turn thy complexion there,[6431][6432]
    Patience, thou young and rose-lipp'd cherubin,[6431][6433]
    Ay, there, look grim as hell![6431][6434]                         65

    _Des._ I hope my noble lord esteems me honest.[6435]

    _Oth._ O, ay; as summer flies are in the shambles,[6436]
    That quicken even with blowing. O thou weed,[6437][6438]
    Who art so lovely fair and smell'st so sweet[6437][6439]
    That the sense aches at thee, would thou hadst ne'er been
              born![6437][6440]                                       70

    _Des._ Alas, what ignorant sin have I committed?

    _Oth._ Was this fair paper, this most goodly book,
    Made to write 'whore' upon? What committed![6441]
    Committed! O thou public commoner![6442]
    I should make very forges of my cheeks,[6442][6443]               75
    That would to cinders burn up modesty,[6442]
    Did I but speak thy deeds. What committed![6442][6444]
    Heaven stops the nose at it, and the moon winks;
    The bawdy wind, that kisses all it meets,
    Is hush'd within the hollow mine of earth,[6445]                  80
    And will not hear it. What committed![6446]
    Impudent strumpet![6447]

    _Des._             By heaven, you do me wrong.

    _Oth._ Are not you a strumpet?

    _Des._                         No, as I am a Christian:
    If to preserve this vessel for my lord
    From any other foul unlawful touch[6448]                          85
    Be not to be a strumpet, I am none.

    _Oth._ What, not a whore?

    _Des._                    No, as I shall be saved.

    _Oth._ Is't possible?

    _Des._ O, heaven forgive us!

    _Oth._                       I cry you mercy then:[6449]
    I took you for that cunning whore of Venice                       90
    That married with Othello. [_Raising his voice_] You, mistress,[6450]
    That have the office opposite to Saint Peter,
    And keep the gate of hell!

                           _Re-enter_ EMILIA.

                               You, you, ay, you![6451]
    We have done our course; there's money for your pains:[6452]
    I pray you, turn the key, and keep our counsel.         [_Exit._  95

    _Emil._ Alas, what does this gentleman conceive?
    How do you, madam? how do you, my good lady?

    _Des._ Faith, half asleep.

    _Emil._ Good madam, what's the matter with my lord?[6453]

    _Des._ With who?[6454]                                           100

    _Emil._ Why, with my lord, madam.[6455]

    _Des._ Who is thy lord?

    _Emil._                 He that is yours, sweet lady.[6456]

    _Des._ I have none: do not talk to me, Emilia;[6457]
    I cannot weep, nor answer have I none[6458]
    But what should go by water. Prithee, to-night[6459]             105
    Lay on my bed my wedding sheets: remember;[6460]
    And call thy husband hither.

    _Emil._                      Here's a change indeed!  [_Exit._[6461]

    _Des._ 'Tis meet I should be used so, very meet.[6462]
    How have I been behaved, that he might stick
    The small'st opinion on my least misuse?                         110

                  _Re-enter_ EMILIA _with_ IAGO.[6463]

    _Iago._ What is your pleasure, madam? How is't with you?[6464]

    _Des._ I cannot tell. Those that do teach young babes[6465]
    Do it with gentle means and easy tasks:
    He might have chid me so; for, in good faith,[6466]
    I am a child to chiding.

    _Iago._                  What's the matter, lady?[6467]          115

    _Emil._ Alas, Iago, my lord hath so bewhored her,
    Thrown such despite and heavy terms upon her,
    As true hearts cannot bear.[6468]

    _Des._ Am I that name, Iago?

    _Iago._                      What name, fair lady?

    _Des._ Such as she says my lord did say I was.[6469]             120

    _Emil._ He call'd her whore: a beggar in his drink
    Could not have laid such terms upon his callat.[6470]

    _Iago._ Why did he so?

    _Des._ I do not know; I am sure I am none such.[6471]

    _Iago._ Do not weep, do not weep. Alas the day!                  125

    _Emil._ Hath she forsook so many noble matches,[6472]
    Her father and her country and her friends,[6473]
    To be call'd whore? would it not make one weep?

    _Des._ It is my wretched fortune.

    _Iago._                           Beshrew him for't![6474][6475]
    How comes this trick upon him?[6474]

    _Des._                         Nay, heaven doth know.            130

    _Emil._ I will be hang'd, if some eternal villain,
    Some busy and insinuating rogue,
    Some cogging, cozening slave, to get some office,
    Have not devised this slander; I'll be hang'd else.[6476]

    _Iago._ Fie, there is no such man; it is impossible.             135

    _Des._ If any such there be, heaven pardon him![6477]

    _Emil._ A halter pardon him! and hell gnaw his bones![6478]
    Why should he call her whore? who keeps her company?[6478]
    What place? what time? what form? what likelihood?[6478]
    The Moor's abused by some most villanous knave,[6479]            140
    Some base notorious knave, some scurvy fellow.
    O heaven, that such companions thou'ldst unfold,[6480]
    And put in every honest hand a whip
    To lash the rascals naked through the world[6481]
    Even from the east to the west!

    _Iago._                         Speak within door.[6482]         145

    _Emil._ O, fie upon them! Some such squire he was[6483]
    That turn'd your wit the seamy side without,
    And made you to suspect me with the Moor.

    _Iago._ You are a fool; go to.

    _Des._                         O good Iago,[6484]
    What shall I do to win my lord again?                            150
    Good friend, go to him; for, by this light of heaven,[6485]
    I know not how I lost him. Here I kneel:[6486][6487]
    If e'er my will did trespass 'gainst his love[6487]
    Either in discourse of thought or actual deed,[6487][6488]
    Or that mine eyes, mine ears, or any sense,[6487]                155
    Delighted them in any other form,[6487][6489]
    Or that I do not yet, and ever did,[6487]
    And ever will, though he do shake me off[6487]
    To beggarly divorcement, love him dearly,[6487]
    Comfort forswear me! Unkindness may do much;[6487][6490]         160
    And his unkindness may defeat my life,[6487]
    But never taint my love. I cannot say 'whore':[6487][6491]
    It doth abhor me now I speak the word;[6487][6492]
    To do the act that might the addition earn[6487]
    Not the world's mass of vanity could make me.[6487]              165

    _Iago._ I pray you, be content; 'tis but his humour:
    The business of the state does him offence,
    And he does chide with you.[6493]

    _Des._ If 'twere no other,--

    _Iago._       'Tis but so, I warrant.      [_Trumpets within._[6494]
    Hark, how these instruments summon to supper![6495]              170
    The messengers of Venice stay the meat:[6496]
    Go in, and weep not; all things shall be well.

                                  [_Exeunt Desdemona and Emilia._[6497]

                           _Enter_ RODERIGO.

    How now, Roderigo![6498]

    _Rod._ I do not find that thou dealest justly with me.[6499]

    _Iago._ What in the contrary?                                    175

    _Rod._ Every day thou daffest me with some device,[6500][6501]
    Iago; and rather, as it seems to me now, keepest from me[6502][6501]
    all conveniency than suppliest me with the least advantage[6501][6503][6504]
    of hope. I will indeed no longer endure it; nor am I yet[6501][6504]
    persuaded to put up in peace what already I have foolishly[6501]  180
    suffered.[6501]

    _Iago._ Will you hear me, Roderigo?

    _Rod._ Faith, I have heard too much; for your words[6505][6506]
    and performances are no kin together.[6506][6507]

    _Iago._ You charge me most unjustly.                             185

    _Rod._ With nought but truth. I have wasted myself[6508]
    out of my means. The jewels you have had from me to[6509]
    deliver to Desdemona would half have corrupted a votarist:[6510]
    you have told me she hath received them and returned[6511]
    me expectations and comforts of sudden respect[6512]             190
    and acquaintance; but I find none.[6513]

    _Iago._ Well; go to; very well.[6514]

    _Rod._ Very well! go to! I cannot go to, man; nor 'tis[6515]
    not very well: by this hand, I say 'tis very scurvy, and[6516]
    begin to find myself fopped in it.[6517]                         195

    _Iago._ Very well.

    _Rod._ I tell you 'tis not very well. I will make myself[6518]
    known to Desdemona: if she will return me my jewels, I
    will give over my suit and repent my unlawful solicitation;
    if not, assure yourself I will seek satisfaction of you.[6519]   200

    _Iago._ You have said now.[6520]

    _Rod._ Ay, and said nothing but what I protest intendment[6521][6522]
    of doing.[6522]

    _Iago._ Why, now I see there's mettle in thee; and even
    from this instant do build on thee a better opinion than[6523]   205
    ever before. Give me thy hand, Roderigo: thou hast taken
    against me a most just exception; but yet, I protest, I[6524]
    have dealt most directly in thy affair.[6525]

    _Rod._ It hath not appeared.

    _Iago._ I grant indeed it hath not appeared, and your            210
    suspicion is not without wit and judgement. But, Roderigo,
    if thou hast that in thee indeed, which I have greater reason[6526]
    to believe now than ever, I mean purpose, courage
    and valour, this night show it: if thou the next night following
    enjoy not Desdemona, take me from this world[6527]               215
    with treachery and devise engines for my life.

    _Rod._ Well, what is it? is it within reason and compass?[6528]

    _Iago._ Sir, there is especial commission come from[6529][6530]
    Venice to depute Cassio in Othello's place.[6530]

    _Rod._ Is that true? why then Othello and Desdemona[6530]        220
    return again to Venice.[6530]

    _Iago._ O, no; he goes into Mauritania, and takes away[6530][6531]
    with him the fair Desdemona, unless his abode be lingered[6530]
    here by some accident: wherein none can be so determinate[6530][6532]
    as the removing of Cassio.[6530]                                 225

    _Rod._ How do you mean, removing of him?[6530][6533]

    _Iago._ Why, by making him uncapable of Othello's[6530][6534]
    place; knocking out his brains.[6530]

    _Rod._ And that you would have me to do?[6535]

    _Iago._ Ay, if you dare do yourself a profit and a right.[6536]  230
    He sups to-night with a harlotry, and thither will I go to him:[6537]
    he knows not yet of his honourable fortune. If you will
    watch his going thence, which I will fashion to fall out between
    twelve and one, you may take him at your pleasure:
    I will be near to second your attempt, and he shall fall between  235
    us. Come, stand not amazed at it, but go along with
    me; I will show you such a necessity in his death that you
    shall think yourself bound to put it on him. It is now high[6538]
    supper-time, and the night grows to waste: about it.[6539]

    _Rod._ I will hear further reason for this.                      240

    _Iago._ And you shall be satisfied.                 [_Exeunt._[6540]


SCENE III. _Another room in the castle._

 _Enter_ OTHELLO, LODOVICO, DESDEMONA, EMILIA, _and_ Attendants.[6541]

    _Lod._ I do beseech you, sir, trouble yourself no further.[6542]

    _Oth._ O, pardon me; 'twill do me good to walk.[6543]

    _Lod._ Madam, good night; I humbly thank your ladyship.

    _Des._ Your honour is most welcome.

    _Oth._                              Will you walk, sir?[6544]
    O,--Desdemona,--[6544][6545]                                       5

    _Des._ My lord?[6546]

    _Oth._ Get you to bed on the instant; I will be returned[6547][6548]
    forthwith: dismiss your attendant there: look it be done.[6548][6549]

    _Des._ I will, my lord.

                     [_Exeunt Othello, Lodovico, and Attendants._[6550]

    _Emil._ How goes it now? he looks gentler than he did.            10

    _Des._ He says he will return incontinent:
    He hath commanded me to go to bed,[6551]
    And bade me to dismiss you.

    _Emil._                     Dismiss me![6552]

    _Des._ It was his bidding; therefore, good Emilia,
    Give me my nightly wearing, and adieu:                            15
    We must not now displease him.

    _Emil._ I would you had never seen him![6553]

    _Des._ So would not I: my love doth so approve him,
    That even his stubbornness, his checks, his frowns,--[6554]
    Prithee, unpin me,--have grace and favour in them.[6555]          20

    _Emil._ I have laid those sheets you bade me on the bed.[6556]

    _Des._ All's one. Good faith, how foolish are our minds![6557]
    If I do die before thee, prithee, shroud me[6558]
    In one of those same sheets.[6559]

    _Emil._                      Come, come, you talk.

    _Des._ My mother had a maid call'd Barbara:[6560]                 25
    She was in love; and he she loved proved mad[6561][6562]
    And did forsake her: she had a song of 'willow;'[6561][6563][6564]
    An old thing 'twas, but it express'd her fortune,
    And she died singing it: that song to-night
    Will not go from my mind; I have much to do[6565][6566][6567]     30
    But to go hang my head all at one side[6566][6568][6569]
    And sing it like poor Barbara. Prithee, dispatch.[6566][6568][6570]

    _Emil._ Shall I go fetch your night-gown?[6566][6571]

    _Des._                                    No, unpin me here.[6566]
    This Lodovico is a proper man.[6566]

    _Emil._ A very handsome man.[6566]                                35

    _Des._ He speaks well.[6566][6572]

    _Emil._ I know a lady in Venice would have walked[6566]
    barefoot to Palestine for a touch of his nether lip.[6566][6573]

    _Des._ [_Singing_] The poor soul sat sighing by a
                        sycamore tree,[6566][6574]
          Sing all a green willow;[6566]                              40
      Her hand on her bosom, her head on her knee,[6566]
          Sing willow, willow, willow:[6566]
      The fresh streams ran by her, and murmur'd her moans;[6566]
          Sing willow, willow, willow;[6566][6575]
      Her salt tears fell from her, and soften'd the stones;--[6566][6576]  45
    Lay by these:--[6566][6577][6578]
        [_Singing_] Sing willow, willow, willow;[6566][6577]
    Prithee, hie thee; he'll come anon:--[6566][6577]
        [_Singing_] Sing all a green willow must be my garland.[6566]
            Let nobody blame him; his scorn I approve,--[6566]        50
    Nay, that's not next. Hark! who is't that knocks?[6566][6579]

    _Emil._ It's the wind.[6580]

    _Des._ [_Singing_] I call'd my love false love; but what
                        said he then?[6581][6582]
            Sing willow, willow, willow:[6575][6581]
    If I court moe women, you'll couch with moe men.[6581][6583]      55
    So get thee gone; good night. Mine eyes do itch;[6584][6585]
    Doth that bode weeping?[6585][6586]

    _Emil._                 'Tis neither here nor there.

    _Des._ I have heard it said so. O, these men, these men![6587]
    Dost thou in conscience think,--tell me, Emilia,--[6587]
    That there be women do abuse their husbands[6587]                 60
    In such gross kind?[6587][6588]

    _Emil._             There be some such, no question.

    _Des._ Wouldst thou do such a deed for all the world?[6589]

    _Emil._ Why, would not you?

    _Des._                      No, by this heavenly light!

    _Emil._ Nor I neither by this heavenly light; I might[6590][6591]
    do't as well i' the dark.[6590][6592]                             65

    _Des._ Wouldst thou do such a deed for all the world?[6593]

    _Emil._ The world's a huge thing: it is a great price[6594][6595]
    For a small vice.[6594]

    _Des._            In troth, I think thou wouldst not.[6596]

    _Emil._ In troth, I think I should; and undo 't when I[6597]
    had done. Marry, I would not do such a thing for a[6598]          70
    joint-ring, nor for measures of lawn, nor for gowns, petticoats,[6599]
    nor caps, nor any petty exhibition; but, for the whole[6600]
    world,--why, who would not make her husband a cuckold to[6601]
    make him a monarch? I should venture purgatory for 't.[6602]

    _Des._ Beshrew me, if I would do such a wrong[6603][6604]         75
    For the whole world.[6603]

    _Emil._ Why, the wrong is but a wrong i' the world;
    and having the world for your labour, 'tis a wrong in your
    own world, and you might quickly make it right.

    _Des._ I do not think there is any such woman.                    80

    _Emil._ Yes, a dozen; and as many to the vantage as
    would store the world they played for.
    But I do think it is their husbands' faults[6605]
    If wives do fall: say that they slack their duties[6605]
    And pour our treasures into foreign laps,[6605]                   85
    Or else break out in peevish jealousies,[6605]
    Throwing restraint upon us, or say they strike us,[6605][6606]
    Or scant our former having in despite,[6605]
    Why, we have galls, and though we have some grace,[6605]
    Yet have we some revenge. Let husbands know[6605]                 90
    Their wives have sense like them: they see and smell[6605]
    And have their palates both for sweet and sour,[6605]
    As husbands have. What is it that they do[6605]
    When they change us for others? Is it sport?[6605]
    I think it is: and doth affection breed it?[6605]                 95
    I think it doth: is't frailty that thus errs?[6605]
    It is so too: and have not we affections,[6605]
    Desires for sport, and frailty, as men have?[6605][6607]
    Then let them use us well: else let them know,[6605][6608]
    The ills we do, their ills instruct us so.[6605][6609]           100

    _Des._ Good night, good night: heaven me such uses send,[6610]
    Not to pick bad from bad, but by bad mend!                [_Exeunt._

FOOTNOTES:

[6212] ACT IV. SCENE I.] Actus 4. Q₁. Actus Quartus. Scæna Prima. Ff.
Actus 4. Scæna 1. Q₂ Q₃.

Cyprus. Before the castle.] The same. Capell. A Room of State. Rowe. A
Court before the Palace. Theobald.

Enter....] Ff. Enter Iago and Othello. Qq.

[6213] _Iago!_] _Iago?_ Ff. _Iago._ Qq.

[6214] _Think ... private?_] As one line, S. Walker conj.

_What ... private?_] Arranged as by Capell. One line in Ff. Continued
to Othello, Lettsom conj.

[6215] _kiss_] _kisse._ Qq. _kisse?_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _kiss?_ F₄.

[6216] _friend_] Qq F₁. _friends_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[6217] _in bed_] Ff. _abed_ Qq.

[6218] _tempts and_] _tempts not,_ Hanmer (Warburton).

[6219] _So_] Qq. _If_ Ff.

[6220] _But if I_] _But I_ F₃ F₄.

[6221] _handkerchief--_] Rowe. _handkerchiefe._ Ff Q₂ Q₃.
_handkercher._ Q₁.

[6222] _Why, then,_] om. Seymour conj.

[6223] _protectress_] _proprietor_ Hanmer. _propertied_ Warburton.
_proprietress_ Capell.

_too_] _to_ Q₁.

[6224] _infected_] Qq. _infectious_ Ff.

[6225] _all_] _ill_ Pope (ed. 2).

[6226] _That's ... said_] As one line, S. Walker conj.

_What, ... wrong?_] Divided as by Dyce. One line in Qq Ff.

[6227] _If I had said_] _If I said_ Pope.

[6228] _heard_] _heare_ F₂. _hear_ F₃ F₄.

[6229] _Or_] _Or by the_ Q₁.

[6230] _Convinced_] F₂ F₃ F₄. _Conuinced_ Q₁ (Dev. and Chip.) F₁.
_Coniured_ Q₁ (Cap.) Q₂. _Conjured_ Q₃. _Convinc'd_ Theobald, Hanmer,
and Capell.

_Convinced or_] _Convinc'd her and_ Keightley.

_supplied_] _suppled_ Theobald, Hanmer, and Capell.

_cannot_] _they cannot_ Theobald. _then cannot_ Hanmer. _straight
cannot_ Capell.

[6231] _blab--_] Malone. _blab:_ Capell. _blab_. Qq F₃ F₄. _blab.)_ F₁
F₂.

[6232] _Faith_] Q₁. _Why_ The rest.

_did--I ... he did._] Qq. _did: I ... he did._ Ff. _did I know not
what;--he did_. Rann (Mason conj.)

[6233] _What? what?_] Ff. _But what?_ Q₁. _What?_ Q₂ Q₃.

[6234] _Lie--_] _Lye--_ Rowe. _Lye._ Qq Ff.

_With her, on_] Qq. _With her? on_ Ff.

[6235]] _We say ... belie her_.] Omitted by Pope.

[6236] _'Zounds,_] _Zouns,_ Q₁. Omitted in the rest.

[6237] _Handkerchief_] _handkerchers_ Q₁. _handkerchiefs_ Q₂ Q₃.

_confessions_] Ff. _confession_ Qq.

_handkerchief_] _hankerchers_ Q₁. _handkerchiefs_ Q₂ Q₃.
_handkerchief--handkerchief_ Theobald.

[6238] _To confess ... to confess._] Put in the margin by Pope. Omitted
by Hanmer.

[6239] _To confess ... devil!_] Omitted in Q₁.

[6240] _shadowing_] _shadowy_ Becket conj. _shuddering_ Collier MS.

_passion_] Omitted by Pope, Theobald, Hanmer, and Warburton.

_instruction_] _Iustruction_ F₁. _induction_ Hanmer (Warburton).
_infraction_ Becket conj.

[6241] _shakes_] _shake_ Rowe.

[6242] [Falls ... trance.] Omitted in Q₁ (Cap.) He fals downe. Q₁ (Dev.
and Chip.)

[6243] _Work on ... Othello!_] Divided as in Ff. Prose in Qq.

[6244] _medicine, work!_] Theobald. _medicine, worke:_ Qq. _medicine
workes._ F₁ F₂. _medicine works._ F₃ F₄.

[6245] SCENE II. Pope.

[6246] _fall'n_] _fell_ Theobald.

[6247] _his_] _the_ F₄.

[6248] _No, forbear;_] Omitted in Ff.

[6249] _his_] om. Q₃.

[6250] _stirs_] _starres_ Q₃.

[6251] [Exit Cassio.] As in Rowe. Opposite _mocke me?_ line 59, in Q₂
Q₃. Omitted in Q₁ Ff.

[6252] _head_] _hand_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[6253] _thou_] om. Q₃.]

_you! no, by_] _you? no by_ Q₁ Q₂. _you not, by_ Ff. _you no by_ Q₃.

_heaven._] _heaven; I mock you not._ Capell.

[6254] _fortune_] Ff. _fortunes_ Qq.

_like_] _life_ F₂.

[6255] _it_] om. Qq.

_Good sir_] _God sir_ Q₁ (Cap.)

[6256] _every_] _ever_ Q₃.

[6257] _there's millions_] _millions are_ Pope.

[6258] _lie_] _lyes_ Q₁.

[6259] _peculiar_] _prculiar_ F₂. _peculior_ Q₃.

_case_] Qq F₁. _cause_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[6260] _'tis_] _this_ Q₃. _it is_ Hanmer, ending lines 68-73 _case ...
hell, ... in ... chaste ... am, ... wise ... apart._

[6261] S. Walker would read as four lines, ending _chaste!... am, ...
wise; ... apart._

[6262] _let_] _let not_ Q₃.

[6263] _she_] om. Steevens conj.

[6264] _'tis_] _that's_ Capell (corrected in Errata).

_you_] _you now_ Hanmer.

[6265] _o'erwhelmed_] _ere while mad_ Q₁.

[6266] _unsuiting_] _vnsuting_ Q₁ (Dev.) _vnfitting_ Q₁ (Cap.) Q₂.
_unfitting_ Q₃. _resulting_ Ff.

[6267] _laid_] _layd_ F₁. _layed_ Qq.

_'scuse upon_] _scuse upon_ Q₂ Q₃. _scuse, upon_ Q₁. _scuses upon_ F₁.
_scuses on_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[6268] _Bade_] _Bid_ Q₁. _Bad_ The rest.

_return_] _retire_ Qq.

_here_] _her_ Q₃.

[6269] _Do_] om. Qq.

[6270] _fleers_] _geeres_ Q₁ (Cap.) Q₂ Q₃. _Ieeres_ Q₁ (Dev.)

_gibes_] _Iibes_ Q₁ (Dev.)

[6271] _hath_] Ff. _has_ Qq.

[6272] _you are_] Qq. _y'are_ Ff.

_in spleen_] _a spleen_ Capell (Johnson conj.) _one spleen_ Lettsom
conj.

[6273] _thou_] om. Capell.

[6274] _cunning_] _cunuing_ Q₁ (Cap.)

[6275] Iago.] aago. F₂.

[6276] _yet_] om. Q₃.

[Othello retires.] Othello withdraws. Rowe. om. Qq Ff.

[6277] _clothes_] _cloathes_ Qq. _cloath_ F₁ F₂. _cloth_ F₃ F₄.

_it is a creature_] Omitted in Q₃.

[6278] _refrain_] _refraine_ Qq. _restraine_ F₁ F₂. _restrain_ F₃ F₄.

[6279] Re-enter Cassio.] Steevens (1793). Enter Cassio. Ff. Ent.
Cassio. or Enter Cas. Qq (opposite line 96). Enter Cassio, at a
Distance. Capell. Transferred to follow _wrong,_ line 102, by Dyce.

[6280] SCENE III. Pope.

[6281] _construe_] Rowe. _conster_ Qq. _conserve_ Ff.

[6282] _Poor_] _Our_ Theobald conj. (withdrawn).

_behaviour_] Qq. _behaviours_ Ff.

[6283] _now_] Qq. om. Ff.

[6284] _worser_] _worse_ Q₃.

_give_ Qq F₁. _gave_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[6285] [Speaking lower. Rowe.

_power_] Qq. _dowre_ Ff.

[6286] _caitiff_] _caitiffe_ Ff. _cative_ Qq.

[6287] Marked as 'Aside' by Theobald.

[6288] _a woman_] Qq. _woman_ Ff.

[6289] _i' faith_] _ifaith_ Q₁. _indeed_ The rest.

[6290] _it_] om. Pope.

[6291] _importunes_] _in portunes_ Q₃.

[6292] _o'er_] _on_ Q₁ Q₂, reading _Now ... on_ as one line. _out_ Q₃,
dividing as Q₁ Q₂.

_well said, well said._] Ff. _well said._ Qq.

[6293] _you ... you_] Qq. _ye ... you_ Ff.

_triumph,_] _triumph o'er me,_ Collier MS.

_Roman_] _rogue_ Warburton.

[6294] _I ... ha!_] Prose first in Pope. Two lines, the first ending
_wit,_ in Q₁. Three, ending _beare ... it ... ha,_ in Ff. Three, ending
_customer; ... wit, ... ha,_ in Q₂ Q₃.

[6295] _I marry her!_] _I marry her?_ Qq. _I marry._ Ff.

_what, a customer!_] Omitted in Q₁.

_I prithee_] _I prethee_ Qq. _prythee_ F₁ F₂. _prethee_ F₃. _prithee_
F₄.

[6296] _So, so, so, so:_] _So, so:_ F₃ F₄.

_they_] om. Q₁.

_win_] F₄. _wins_ Q₁ Q₂. _wines_ Q₃. _winnes_ F₁ F₂ F₃.

[6297] _Faith_] Q₁. _Why_ The rest.

_that_] om. Q₁.

_shall_] Qq F₃ F₄. om. F₁ F₂.

[6298] _very_] om. Hanmer.

[6299] _Have ... me?_] Erased in Collier MS.

_Have_] Ff. _Ha_ Qq.

_scored me? Well._] _scoar'd me? Well._ F₁ Q₂ Q₃. _stor'd me well._ Q₁.
_scoar'd me; Well._ F₂ F₃ F₄. _coxed me? Well._ Jackson conj.

[6300] _This ... promise._] Prose in Qq. Three lines, ending _out: ...
her ... promise,_ in Ff.

[6301] _beckons_] Qq F₃ F₄. _becomes_ F₁. _becons_ F₂.

[6302] _the other_] Ff. _tother_ Qq.

[6303] _the_] Ff. _this_ Qq.

[6304] _and, by this hand, she falls me thus_] Collier. _by this hand
she fals thus_ Q₁. _and falls me thus_ Ff. _fals me thus_ Q₂ Q₃.

[6305] _neck--_] Rowe. A full stop in Qq Ff.

[6306] _gesture_] _iesture_ Q₁ F₁.

[6307] _So ... ha!_] Prose in Qq. Two lines in Ff.

[6308] _lolls_] _iolls_ Q₂. _jolls_ Q₃.

_hales_ Q₁ Q₂. _hals_ Q₃. _shakes_ Ff.

[6309] _Now ... to._] Prose in Ff. Two lines in Qq.

[6310] _O_] om. Qq.

_not_] Qq F₁. _now_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[6311] _throw it_] Ff. _throw't_ Qq.

[6312] _Before ... comes_] Continued to Cassio in Q₂ Q₃.

[6313] SCENE IV. Pope.

_'Tis ... one._] Continued to 'Iago' in Q₁.

_fitchew_] _ficho_ Q₁.

Enter Bianca.] As in Dyce. After line 141 in Qq. After line 142 in Ff.

[6314] _handkerchief_] _handkercher_ Q₁.

[6315] _the work_] _the whole worke_ Q₁.

[6316] _not know_] Qq. _know not_ Ff.

[6317] _your_] Ff. _the_ Qq.

[6318] [Casting it to him. Collier (Collier MS.)

[6319] _How ... now!_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[6320] _An_] Qq. _If_ Ff.

_an_] Qq. _if_ Ff.

[6321] _Faith_] Q₁. The rest omit.

_i' the_] Qq. _in the_ Ff.

_street_] Q₂ Q₃. _streete_ Q₁. _streets_ Ff.

[6322] _Will ... there?_] _You sup there._ Q₂ Q₃.

[6323] _Faith_] Q₁. _Yes_ The rest.

[6324] _to; say_] F₂ F₃ F₄. _to, say_ Q₁. _too: say_ F₁. _to say_ Q₂ Q₃.

[Exit Cassio.] Qq. Exit. Ff.

[6325] SCENE V. Manent Othello and Jago. Pope.

[Advancing] Coming hastily from his Concealment. Capell. om. Qq Ff.

[6326] _Iago_] _Iaga_ Q₂.

[6327] Iago. _Yours ..._ Oth.] Omitted in Qq.

[6328] _I would ... woman!_] Prose in Qq. Two lines in Ff.

[6329] _that._] Ff. _that_ Q₂ Q₃. om. Q₁.

[6330] _Ay,_] _I,_ Ff. _And_ Qq.

[6331] _stone_] _a stone_ Q₂ Q₃.

[6332] _hath_] Ff. _has_ Qq.

[6333] _but_] _not_ Q₂ Q₃.

[6334] _and_ Qq F₁. _a_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[6335] _invention:--_] Dyce. _invention!--_ Rowe. _invention._ Qq.
_invention?_ Ff.

[6336] _O,_] om. Qq.

[6337] _O ... condition!_] Prose in Qq. Two lines in Ff.

[6338] _thousand thousand_] Qq. _thousand, a thousand_ Ff.

[6339] _a condition_] _condition_ Pope.

[6340] _Nay,_] _I_ Q₁.

_Nay ... certain:_] A separate line in Ff.

[6341] _O Iago ... Iago!_] _the pitty._ Q₁. _oh the pitty._ Q₂ Q₃.

[6342] _are_] Ff. _be_ Qq.

[6343] _touch_] Ff. _touches_ Qq.

[6344] _night. I'll_] _night I'le_ Q₁. _night Ile_ Q₂ Q₃.

[6345] _beauty_] _her beauty_ F₃ F₄.

[6346] _her in_] _here in_ Q₃.

[6347] _even_] _Even in_ Pope, reading as verse.

[6348] _Good, good:_] In a separate line in Ff.

_pleases: very_] Ff. _pleases, very_ Q₂ Q₃. _pleases very_ Q₁.

[6349] _And ... midnight._] Prose in Qq. Two lines in Ff.

[6350] _Excellent ... same?_] One line in Ff. Two in Qq.

[A trumpet within.] As in Dyce. A Trumpet. Qq, after _midnight_, line
205. Omitted in Ff.

[6351] _Something ... him._] As in Qq. See note (VIII).

[6352] _Venice, sure. 'Tis_] Theobald. _Venice sure, tis_ Q₁. _Venice
sure; tis_ Q₂. _Venice sure 'tis_ Q₃.

[6353] Enter ...] As in Theobald. After line 205 in Qq Ff.

[6354] _God save the_] Q₁. _Save you_ Qq F₁ F₂. _Save you,_ F₃ F₄.

_sir_] om. Seymour conj., reading with Q₁.

[6355] _senators_] Qq. _the senators_ Ff.

[Gives ... letter.] Rowe. om. Qq Ff.

[6356] _pleasures_] _good pleasures_ Hanmer.

[Opens ...] opens, and peruses it Capell. om. Qq Ff.

[6357] _I ... Cyprus._] Divided as in Ff Q₂ Q₃. One line in Q₁.

[6358] _very_] om. Capell.

[6359] _you_] _you, sir_ Capell.

[6360] _lord?_] Ff. _lord._ Qq.

[6361] [Reads] Theobald. om. Qq Ff.

[6362] _'twixt my_] _betweene thy_ Q₁.

[6363] _atone_] _attune_ Becket conj.

[6364] _By my troth_] Q₁. _Trust me_ The rest.

_I am_] _I'm_ Steevens (1793).

[6365] _you mad._] _you--glad._ Anon. conj.

_Why_] Ff. _How_ Qq.

_Othello?_] Qq Ff. _Othello,--_ Dyce.

[6366] [Striking her.] Theobald. om. Qq Ff.

[6367] _woman's_] _womens_ Qq.

[6368] [Going.] Rowe. om. Qq Ff.

[6369] _an_] Qq. om. Ff.

[6370] _she's_] _she is_ Q₃.

[6371] _tears._] _tears?_ Warner conj.

[6372] _home_] _here_ Q₁.

[6373] [He strikes her. Anon. MS. See note (IV).

[Exit Des.] Rowe. om. Qq Ff.

[6374] _Goats and monkeys_] As in Qq. A separate line in Ff.

[6375] SCENE VII. Manent Lodovico and Jago. Pope.

[6376] _This the nature_] Pope. _This the noble nature_ Qq. _Is this
the nature_ Ff.

[6377] _Whom_] _Which_ Pope.

[6378] _accident_] _accidents_ Jennens.

_nor_] _or_ Hanmer.

_chance_] _change_ Theobald.

[6379] _graze_] _raze_ Theobald (Warburton).

[6380] _light of_] Qq F₁. _of light_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[6381] _that_] _what_ Pope.

_breathe_] Q₁ F₃ F₄. _breath_ The rest.

[6382] _censure What_] Jennens. _censure, What_ Qq. _censure. What_ Ff.

[6383] _if what_] _if as_ Q₁.

[6384] _Is it_] _It is_ Q₃.

[6385] _this_] Qq. _his_ Ff.

[6386] _him_] om. Q₂ Q₃.

[6387] _after_] _after him_ Q₂ Q₃.

[6388] _I am sorry_] _I'm sorry_ Pope.

_that I am_] _that I was_ Hanmer.

[6389] SCENE II.] SCENE VIII. Pope.

A room in the castle.] Malone. An Apartment in the Palace. Theobald.

[6390] _You ... seen_] As two lines, the first ending _heard_, S.
Walker conj.

[6391] _then?_] Ff. _then._ Qq.

[6392] _Yes,_] Ff. _Yes, and_ Qq.

_she_] Qq Ff. _her_ Pope.

[6393] _them_] Ff. _'em_ Qq.

[6394] _Nor_] _Never_ Q₃.

[6395] _Never._] _Never, my lord._ Keightley, reading _Nor ... lord_ as
one line.

[6396] _her gloves, her mask_] Ff. _her mask, her gloves_ Qq.

_nothing?_] Q₁ Ff. _nothing_ Q₂. _nothing,_ Q₃.

[6397] _have_] F₁ F₂. _ha_ Qq. _hath_ F₃ F₄.

[6398] _heaven_] _heavens_ Q₁.

_requite_] Q₁ F₂ F₃ F₄. _requit_ F₁. _require_ Q₂ Q₃.

[6399] _their wives_] _her sex_ Q₁.

[6400] [Exit ...] Exit Æmilia. Ff. Exit Emillia. Qq (after _slander_).

[6401] _whore_] _one_ Hanmer.

[6402] _closet_] _closet,_ Qq.

[6403] _I have_] Ff. _I ha_ Qq. _I've_ Pope.

Enter Desdemona with ...] Enter Desdemona and ... Qq Ff. Re-enter
Emilia with Desdemona. Capell.

[6404] SCENE IX. Pope.

_Pray_] Qq. _Pray you_ Ff.

[6405] _Let ... face._] Divided as in Capell. One line in Qq Ff.

[6406] [To Emilia] Hanmer.

[6407] _nay_] _May_ F₁.

[Exit Emilia.] Omitted in Q₂ Q₃.

[6408] _knees_] Qq. _knee_ Ff.

_doth_] Ff. _does_ Qq.

[6409] _But not the words_] Qq. Omitted in Ff. _But not your words_
Pope.

[6410] _But ... thyself;_] Two lines, the first ending _lord;_ in
Capell. Three, ending _words ... true ... thyself;_ in Steevens (1793).

[6411] _Come ... honest._] Arranged as in Qq. Prose in Ff. Three lines,
ending _one ... thee ... honest,_ in Rowe.

[6412] _Lest_] Q₂ Q₃. _Least_ Q₁. _least_ F₁. om. F₂ F₃ F₄ and Rowe.

[6413] _seize_] F₄. _cease_ Qq. _ceaze_ F₁ F₂. _ceise_ F₃.

[6414] _Heaven ... hell._] As in Qq Ff. Rowe divides the line at
_knows_.

[6415] _To ... false?_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[6416] _O Desdemona_] Qq. _Ah Desdemon_ Ff. _Ah, Desdemona_ Theobald.

[6417] _heavy_] _heavenly_ Q₃.

[6418] _motive_] _occasion_ Qq.

_these_] Ff. _those_ Qq.

[6419] _haply_ Qq. _happely_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _happily_ F₄.

[6420] _you have_] _you've_ Pope.

[6421] _lost ... lost_] _left ... left_ Q₁.

[6422] _Why_] Qq. om. Ff.

_heaven_] _heavens_ Johnson. _God_ Anon. conj.

[6423] _they_] Ff. _he_ Qq. _it_ Hanmer.

_rain'd_] _ram'd_ Q₁.

[6424] _kinds_] Q₃. _kindes_ Q₁ Q₂. _kind_ Ff.

_bare head_] Qq F₄. _bare-head_ F₁ F₂ F₃.

[6425] _Given_] _Give_ Q₃.

_utmost_] Ff. om. Qq.

[6426] _place_] Ff. _part_ Qq.

[6427] _drop_] _prop_ Theobald conj. (withdrawn).

[6428] _A ... at!_] See note (IX).

[6429] _fountain_] _foundation_ Q₃.

[6430] _cistern_] F₄. _cesterne_ Qq F₁ F₂. _cestern_ F₃.

_toads_] _taodes_ Q₃.

[6431] _Turn ..._ Des. _I hope_] _Turn thee, complexion, there, Ay,
there ... hell._ Des. _Patience ... cherubim--I hope_ Becket conj.

[6432] _there_] _thence_ Warburton.

[6433] _thou_] Ff. _thy_ Qq.

[6434] _Ay, there,_] Capell. _Ay, there_ Theobald. _I here_ Qq F₃ F₄.
_I heere_ F₁ F₂. _There, there_ Hanmer. _Ay, here,_ Johnson.

[6435] _noble_] om. F₂ F₃ F₄.

[6436] _summer flies_] _sommer flyes_ F₁ F₂. _sommer flies_ F₃.
_summer-flies_ F₄. _summers flies_ Qq.

_shambles_] _shamples_ Q₃.

[6437] _That ... born!_] Divided as in Capell. Four lines, ending
_blowing: ... faire?... thee, ... borne_ in Qq. Four, ending _weed: ...
sweete, ... thee, ... borne,_ in Ff.

[6438] _thou_] Ff. _thou blacke_ Q₁. _thou black_ Q₂ Q₃. _thou bale_
Warburton. _thou base_ Heath conj.

[6439] _Who_] Ff. _why_ Qq.

_and_] Ff. _Thou_ Qq.

[6440] _aches_] _akes_ Qq F₁. _askes_ F₂. _asks_ F₃ F₄.

_ne'er_] _ne're_ Qq. _never_ Ff.

[6441] _upon_] _on_ Q₁.

_What_] _What,_ Q₁. _What, what_ Theobald. _What sin_ Keightley.

[6442] _Committed ... committed!_] Omitted in Q₁.

[6443] _my_] _thy_ Grant White conj.

[6444] _Did_] _Should_ Capell (corrected in Errata).

_I but_] _but I_ F₃ F₄.

_deeds_] _deed_ Jennens.

_What_] _What, what_ Theobald. _What sin_ Keightley.

[6445] _hollow_] _hallow_ Q₁.

[6446] _hear it_] Steevens. _hear't_ Qq Ff. _hear of it_ Keightley.

_What committed!_] _Committed?_ Hanmer, reading _And ... strumpet!_
as one line. _Committed! what, committed!_ Capell. _Committed! what!_
Seymour conj. _What sin committed!_ Keightley.

[6447] _Imprudent strumpet!_] As in Capell. At end of line 81 in Qq.
Omitted in Ff.

[6448] _other_] _hated_ Q₁.

[6449] _forgive us_] _forgivenesse_ Q₁.

_then_] om. Q₁.

[6450] [Raising....] Edd. (Globe ed.) om. Qq Ff.

SCENE X. Pope.

_You, mistress,_] _Come you, mistress,_ Hanmer. _You, mistress, there!_
Capell.

[6451] _keep_] Rowe. _keepes_ Qq F₁ F₂. _keeps_ F₃ F₄.

_gate of_] Ff. _gates in_ Qq.

Re-enter....] As in Dyce. Enter Emillia. After line 87 in Q₁; after
line 90 in Q₂ Q₃. Enter Æmilia. Ff (after line 91). After _Othello_ in
Pope.

_You, you, ay, you!_] _I, you, you, you;_ Q₁.

[6452] _have_] Ff. _ha_ Qq.

[6453] _Good madam_] Arranged as in Qq. In a separate line in Ff.

[6454] _who?_] _whom?_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _whom, Æmilia?_ Hanmer.

[6455] _Why_] om. Capell.

[6456] Des. _Who ... lady._] Omitted in Q₁.

[6457] _have_] Ff. _ha_ Qq.

[6458] _answer_] Q₁ Q₃. _answere_ Q₂. _answeres_ F₁ F₂. _answers_ F₃ F₄.

[6459] _Prithee,_] _Pray_ Pope.

[6460] _my wedding_] _our wedding_ Q₁.

[6461] _Here's_] _Here is_ Qq.

[6462] _very meet_] _very well_ Q₁.

[6463] _small'st_] Ff Q₂ Q₃. _smallest_ Q₁.

_on_] _of_ Pope.

_least misuse_] _greatest abuse_ Q₁. _great'st abuse_ Steevens (1773).
_least misdeed_ Collier MS.

Re-enter....] Capell. Enter Iago and Emillia. Qq. Enter Iago, and
Æmilia. Ff.

[6464] SCENE XI. Pope.

_What ... you?_] One line in Pope. Two in Qq Ff.

[6465] _young_] Qq. _yong_ F₁. _your_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[6466] _have_] Ff. _ha_ Qq.

[6467] _to_] _at_ Q₁.

_What's_] F₄. _What is_ Qq F₁ F₂ F₃.

[6468] _As_] Qq. _That_ Ff.

_bear_] _beare_ Qq. _beare it_ F₁ F₂. _bear it_ F₃ F₄.

[6469] _says_] _sayes_ Qq. _said_ Ff.

[6470] _laid_] _layed_ Q₁ Q₂. _laied_ Q₃.

_such_] _worse_ Capell conj.

[6471] _I am sure_] _I'm sure_ Pope.

[6472] _Hath_] Ff. _Has_ Qq.

[6473] _and her friends_] _all her friends_ Q₁.

[6474] _Beshrew ... him?_] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

[6475] _for't_] Ff. _for it_ Qq.

[6476] _Have_] Qq F₁. _Has_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

_I'll_] _I'le_ Q₁. _Ile_ Q₂ Q₃. _I will_ Ff.

[6477] _there be_] _there are_ Q₂ Q₃.

[6478] _A halter ... likelihood?_] Three lines in Qq. Six in Ff.

[6479] _most villanous_] _outragious_ Q₁.

[6480] _heaven_] Qq. _heavens_ Ff

_companions_] _companion_ Hanmer.

_thou'ldst_] _shouldst_ Q₃.

[6481] _rascals_] _rascalls_ F₁. _rascall_ Qq F₂ F₃. _rascal_ F₄.

[6482] _door_] _dores_ Qq.

[6483] _them_] Ff. _him_ Qq.

[6484] _O good Iago_] Qq. _Alas Iago_ F₁ F₂. _Alass, Iago_ F₃. _Alas,
Iago_ F₄.

[6485] _for_] om. Pope.

[6486] _I know ... kneel:_] One line in Ff. Two in Q₂ Q₃.

[Kneeling. Rowe.

[6487] _Here ... make me._] Omitted in Q₁.

[6488] _Either_] _Or_ Pope.

_discourse of thought_] _discursive thought_ Jackson conj.

_of thought_] Ff. _or thought_ Q₂ Q₃.

[6489] _them in_] Q₂ Q₃. _them: or_ Ff. _them on_ Rowe.

[6490] _forswear me! Unkindness_] _for sware me unkindnesse_ Q₃.

[6491] _cannot_] _can't_ Pope.

[6492] _doth_] Q₂ Q₃. _do's_ Ff.

[6493] _And ... you._] Qq. Omitted in Ff.

[6494] _other,--_] _other--_ Pope. _other._ Qq Ff.

_'Tis_] _Tis_ Qq. _It is_ Ff.

_warrant_] Ff. _warrant you_ Qq.

[Trumpets within.] Trumpets. Rowe. om Qq Ff.

[6495] _summon_] Ff. _summon you_ Qq.

[6496] _The ... meat_] Knight. _The messengers of Venice staies the
meate_ F₁. _The messenger of Venice staies the meate_ F₂ F₃ F₄ (_stayes
the meat_ F₃ F₄). _And the great messengers of Venice stay_ Q₁. _The
meate, great messengers of Venice stay_ Q₂ Q₃.

[6497] _well_] _will_ Q₃.

[Exeunt....] Ff. Exit women. Qq.

[6498] SCENE XII. Pope.

[6499] _I ... me._] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[6500] _daffest_] _daff'st_ Collier. _dofftst_ Qq. _dafts_ F₁. _dofts_
F₂ F₃ F₄. _doffest_ Q (1695).

_device_] F₂ F₃ F₄. _devise_ Qq F₁.

[6501] _Every ... suffered._] Prose in Ff Q₂ Q₃. Six lines in Q₁.

[6502] _me now,_] _me, thou_ Q₁.

[6503] _than_] _then_ Qq F₁ F₂ F₃. _thou_ F₄. _that_ Warburton.

[6504] _advantage of hope_] _hope of advantage_ Collier conj.

[6505] _Faith_] Q₁. _Sir_ Q₂ Q₃. om. Ff.

_for_] Qq. _and_ Ff. See note (X).

[6506] Prose in Ff. Two lines in Q₁. Three in Q₂ Q₃.

[6507] _performances_] Ff. _performance_ Qq.

[6508] _With ... truth._] Omitted in Q₁.

[6509] _my_] Ff. om. Qq.

[6510] _to_] Qq. om. Ff.

[6511] _hath_] Ff. _has_ Qq.

_them_] Ff. _em_ Qq.

[6512] _expectations_] Ff. _expectation_ Qq.

_comforts_] _comforst_ Q₃.

[6513] _acquaintance_] Ff Q₂. _acquittance_ Q₁. _acquintance_ Q₃.

[6514] _very well_] _very good_ Q₁.

[6515] _nor 'tis_] _it is_ Q₁.

[6516] _by ... scurvy_] Q₁. _Nay I think it is scurvy_ Ff. _I say t' is
very scurvy_ Q₂ Q₃.

[6517] _fopped_] _fopt_ Qq Ff. _fob'd_ Rowe.

[6518] _I tell you 'tis_] Ff. _I say it is_ Qq.

[6519] _I will_] Ff. _I'le_ Q₁. _Ile_ Q₂ Q₃.

[6520] _now._] _now_? Anon. conj.

[6521] _and said_] _and I have said_ Q₁.

[6522] _intendment_] Ff. _entendment_ Qq.

[6523] _instant_] _time_ Q₁.

_build_] _I build_ Rowe.

[6524] _exception_] Ff. _conception_ Qq.

_but yet_] _but_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[6525] _affair_] _affaires_ Q₁.

[6526] _in thee_] Ff. _within thee_ Qq.

[6527] _enjoy_] Ff. _enjoyest_ Qq.

[6528] _what is it?_] Ff. Omitted in Qq.

[6529] _especial_] _a special_ Malone conj.

_commission_] _command_ Q₁.

[6530] _Sir ... brains._] Prose in Ff. Eleven irregular lines in Qq.

[6531] _takes_] Qq. _taketh_ Ff.

[6532] _wherein_] _whereof_ Capell conj.

[6533] _of_] Qq. om. Ff.

[6534] _by making_] _making_ Capell conj.

_uncapable_] _incapable_ Hanmer.

[6535] _do?_] Pope. _doe._ Q₁ F₁ Q₂ F₂. _doe_ Q₃. _do._ F₃ F₄.

[6536] _if_] Ff. _and if_ Qq.

_a right_] Ff. _right_ Qq.

[6537] _harlotry_] _harlot_ Q₁.

[6538] _high_] _nigh_ Mason conj.

[6539] _waste_] F₃. _wast_ The rest. _waist_ Malone conj.

[6540] [Exeunt.] Ff Q₂ Q₃. Ex. Iag. and Rod. Q₁.

[6541] SCENE III.] SCENE XIII. Pope.

Another room....] Malone. A Room.... Capell.

Enter....] Ff. Enter ... Desdemona, Lodovico,.... After _about it,_
line 239 of previous scene, in Q₁. Enter ... Desdemona, Lodovico.... Q₂
Q₃.

[6542] _I do beseech_] _'Beseech_ Capell.

[6543] _me_] om. F₃ F₄.

_'twill_] _it shall_ Qq.

[6544] _Will ... Desdemona,--_] As in Capell. One line in Qq Ff.

[6545] _O,--_] Capell. _O_ Qq. _Oh_ Ff.

_Desdemona,--_] Capell. _Desdemona._ Qq Ff.

[Stepping back. Capell.

[6546] _lord?_] Capell. _lord._ Qq. Ff. _lord!_ Hanmer.

[6547] _on the_] _on th'_ Ff. _o' the_ Qq.

[6548] _returned forthwith:_] _return'd forthwith:_ Ff. _return'd,
forthwith,_ Q₁. _return'd, forthwith_ Q₂ Q₃.

[6549] _dismiss_] _dispatch_ Qq.

_look it_] _look't_ Ff.

[6550] [Exeunt....] Capell. Exeunt. Qq (after _done,_ line 8). Exit Ff
(after _done,_ line 8). Ex. Lod. &c. Hanmer (after line 5).

[6551] _He hath_] Qq. _And hath_ Ff.

[6552] _bade_] Q₂ Q₃. _bad_ Q₁. _bid_ Ff.

_Dismiss_] _To dismiss_ Keightley.

[6553] _I would_] Q₁ F₂ F₃ F₄. _I, would_ F₁. _Would_ Q₂ Q₃.

[6554] _checks_] _cheeks_ Jennens.

_his frowns_] _and frownes_ Qq.

[6555] _grace ... them._] _a grace and favour._ S. Walker conj.

_in them_] om. Ff.

[6556] _laid_] _laied_ Q₁ Q₂.

_those_] _these_ Q₁.

_bade_] Q₁. _bad_ The rest.

[6557] _one. Good faith,_] _one.--Good faith,_ Dyce. _one good faith:_
Q₁. _one, good father;_ Q₂ Q₃. _one: good Father,_ Ff.

[6558] _thee_] om. F₁.

[6559] _those_] Qq. _these_ Ff.

[6560] _Barbara_] _Barbary_ Qq. _Barbarie_ F₁.

[6561] _and ... her:_] _and he, she lov'd, forsook her, And she prov'd
mad_ Warburton.

[6562] _mad_] _bad_ Capell (Theobald conj.) _man_ Jackson conj. _false_
Keightley.

[6563] _had_] _has_ Q₁.

[6564] _willow_] _willough_ F₁ F₂.

[6565] _Will ... do_] One line in Ff. Two in Q₂ Q₃.

[6566] _I have ... next._] Omitted in Q₁.

[6567] _I have_] _I've_ Pope.

_to do_] _ado_ Pope.

[6568] _But ... dispatch._] Prose in Q₂ Q₃.

[6569] _But_] _Not_ Hanmer (Theobald conj.)

_at one_] _on one_ Hanmer. _o' one_ Capell.

[6570] _Barbara_] _Brabarie_ F₁. _Barbary_ Q₂ Q₃.

[6571] _go_] om. Capell.

[6572] _He speaks_] _And he speaks_ Capell.

[6573] _barefoot_] _barefooted_ Q₂ and Q (1695).

_for_] _fore_ Q₃.

_nether_] _neither_ Qq F₂.

[going on with her undressing. Capell.

[6574] Des. [Singing] Desdemona sings. Qq. Des. Ff.

_sighing_] Q₂. _singing_ Ff. _singhing_ Q₃. _sining_ F₁ (Devonshire
copy).

[6575] _willow, willow, willow_] Q₂ Q₃. _willough, &c._ F₁ F₂ F₃.
_willow, &c._ F₄.

[6576] _Her salt_] _The salt_ Capell.

_and_] Ff. _which_ Qq.

[6577] See note (XI).

[6578] [giving her her Jewels. Capell.

[6579] _Hark!_] _Hark! hark!_ Capell.

_who is't that_] Ff. _who's that_ Qq.

[6580] _It's_] Ff (_its_ F₂). _It is_ Q₁. _T'is_ Q₂ Q₃.

[6581] _I ... men_] Omitted in Q₁.

[6582] [Singing] om. Qq Ff.

_false love_] _false_ Q₂ Q₃.

[6583] _moe women_] _mo women_ F₁ Q₂ F₂ Q₃. _no women_ F₃ F₄. _more
women_ Rowe.

_couch_] _touch_ Upton conj.

_moe men_] _mo men_ Ff Q₂ Q₃. _more men_ Rowe.

[6584] _So_] _Now_ Q₁.

[6585] _Mine ... weeping?_] As in Ff Q₂ Q₃. One line in Q₁.

[6586] _Doth_] Ff. _does_ Q₁. _Does_ Q₂ Q₃.

[6587] Des. _I have ... question._] Omitted in Q₁.

[6588] _kind_] _kindes_ Q₂ Q₃.

[6589] _deed_] _thing_ Q₂ Q₃.

[6590] _Nor ... dark._] Prose by Hanmer. Two lines, the first ending
_light_, in Qq Ff.

[6591] _Nor_] _No, nor_ Capell, reading as verse.

[6592] _do 't as well i'_] _doe it as well in_ Q₁. _as well doe it in_
Q₂ Q₃.

[6593] _Wouldst_] _Would_ Q₁.

_deed_] _thing_ Q₁.

[6594] _The ... vice._] Divided as in Qq. The first line ends _thing_:
in Ff. Prose in Hanmer. Dyce (ed. 2) prints _it ... vice_ as a couplet.

[6595] _world's ... it is_] _world is ... it is_ Qq. _world is ...
'tis_ Steevens.

[6596] _In troth_] _Good troth_ Q₁.

[6597] _In troth_] _By my troth_ Q₁.

_undo 't_] _unswear 't_ Hanmer.

[6598] _done_] _done it_ Qq.

[6599] _nor for measures_] _or for measures_ Qq.

_petticoats_] _or petticotes_ Q₁.

[6600] _nor caps_] Q₁ Ff. _or caps_ Q₂ Q₃.

_petty_] _such_ Q₁.

_the whole_] Qq. _all the whole_ Ff.

_world,--_] Capell. _world?_ Q₁. _world:_ The rest.

[6601] _why,_] _vds pitty,_ Q₁.

[6602] _for 't_] Ff. _for it_ Qq.

[6603] _Beshrew ... world._] Divided as in Qq Ff. Prose in Jennens.

[6604] _a wrong_] _wrong_ Q₂ Q₃.

[6605] _But ... so._] Omitted in Q₁.

[6606] _upon_] _on_ Rowe (ed. 2).

[6607] _sport_] _sports_ Warburton.

[6608] _them ... them_] Ff. _em ... em_ Q₂ Q₃.

[6609] _The ills_] _The ill_ Q₃.

_so_] F₁ Q₂ Q₃. _to._ F₂ F₃ F₄.

[6610] _Good ... send,_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_heaven_] _God_ Q₁.

_uses_] _usage_ Q₁.




ACT V.


SCENE I. _Cyprus. A street._[6611]

                      _Enter_ IAGO _and_ RODERIGO.

    _Iago._ Here, stand behind this bulk; straight will he come:[6612]
    Wear thy good rapier bare, and put it home:
    Quick, quick; fear nothing; I'll be at thy elbow:
    It makes us, or it mars us; think on that,[6613]
    And fix most firm thy resolution.[6614]                            5

    _Rod._ Be near at hand; I may miscarry in 't.

    _Iago._ Here, at thy hand: be bold, and take thy stand.

                                                      [_Retires._[6615]

    _Rod._ I have no great devotion to the deed;[6616]
    And yet he hath given me satisfying reasons:[6617]
    'Tis but a man gone. Forth, my sword: he dies.[6618]              10

    _Iago._ I have rubb'd this young quat almost to the sense,[6619]
    And he grows angry. Now, whether he kill Cassio,[6620]
    Or Cassio him, or each do kill the other,
    Every way makes my gain: live Roderigo,[6621]
    He calls me to a restitution large                                15
    Of gold and jewels that I bobb'd from him,[6622]
    As gifts to Desdemona:
    It must not be: if Cassio do remain,
    He hath a daily beauty in his life[6623]
    That makes me ugly; and besides, the Moor                         20
    May unfold me to him; there stand I in much peril:[6624]
    No, he must die. Be't so. I hear him coming.[6625]

                            _Enter_ CASSIO.

    _Rod._ I know his gait; 'tis he. Villain, thou diest!

                                        [_Makes a pass at Cassio._[6626]

    _Cas._ That thrust had been mine enemy indeed,[6627]
    But that my coat is better than thou know'st:[6628]               25
    I will make proof of thine.           [_Draws, and wounds Roderigo._

    _Rod._                      O, I am slain!

          [_Iago from behind wounds Cassio in the leg, and exit._[6629]

    _Cas._ I am maim'd for ever. Help, ho! murder! murder!

                                                        [_Falls._[6630]

                         _Enter_ Othello.[6631]

    _Oth._ The voice of Cassio: Iago keeps his word.[6632]

    _Rod._ O, villain that I am!

    _Oth._                       It is even so.[6633]

    _Cas._ O, help, ho! light! a surgeon!                             30

    _Oth._ 'Tis he. O brave Iago, honest and just,
    That hast such noble sense of thy friend's wrong!
    Thou teachest me. Minion, your dear lies dead,
    And your unblest fate hies: strumpet, I come![6634]
    Forth of my heart those charms, thine eyes, are blotted;[6635]    35
    Thy bed lust-stain'd shall with lust's blood be spotted.    [_Exit._

                 _Enter_ LODOVICO _and_ GRATIANO.[6636]

    _Cas._ What, ho! no watch? no passage? murder! murder![6637]

    _Gra._ 'Tis some mischance; the cry is very direful.[6638]

    _Cas._ O, help!

    _Lod._ Hark!                                                      40

    _Rod._ O wretched villain!

    _Lod._ Two or three groan: it is a heavy night:[6639]
    These may be counterfeits: let's think't unsafe
    To come in to the cry without more help.[6640]

    _Rod._ Nobody come? then shall I bleed to death.[6641]            45

    _Lod._ Hark![6642]

                 _Re-enter_ IAGO, _with a light_.[6643]

    _Gra._ Here's one comes in his shirt, with light and weapons.[6644]

    _Iago._ Who's there? whose noise is this that cries on murder?[6645]

    _Lod._ We do not know.

    _Iago._                Did not you hear a cry?[6646]

    _Cas._ Here, here! for heaven's sake, help me![6647]

    _Iago._                                        What's the matter?  50

    _Gra._ This is Othello's ancient, as I take it.

    _Lod._ The same indeed; a very valiant fellow.

    _Iago._ What are you here that cry so grievously?

    _Cas._ Iago? O, I am spoil'd, undone by villains![6648]
    Give me some help.                                                55

    _Iago._ O me, lieutenant! what villains have done this?[6649]

    _Cas._ I think that one of them is hereabout,[6650]
    And cannot make away.

    _Iago._               O treacherous villains!
    What are you there? come in and give some help.

                                     [_To Lodovico and Gratiano._[6651]

    _Rod._ O, help me here![6652]                                     60

    _Cas._ That's one of them.

    _Iago._                    O murderous slave! O villain!

                                               [_Stabs Roderigo._[6653]

    _Rod._ O damn'd Iago! O inhuman dog![6654]

    _Iago._ Kill men i' the dark! Where be these bloody thieves?[6655]
    How silent is this town! Ho! murder! murder!
    What may you be? are you of good or evil?                         65

    _Lod._ As you shall prove us, praise us.

    _Iago._ Signior Lodovico?[6656]

    _Lod._ He, sir.

    _Iago._ I cry you mercy. Here's Cassio hurt by villains.

    _Gra._ Cassio![6657]                                              70

    _Iago._ How is't, brother?[6658]

    _Cas._ My leg is cut in two.

    _Iago._                      Marry, heaven forbid!
    Light, gentlemen: I'll bind it with my shirt.

                            _Enter_ BIANCA.

    _Bian._ What is the matter, ho? who is't that cried?[6659]

    _Iago._ Who is't that cried![6660]                                75

    _Bian._ O my dear Cassio! my sweet Cassio! O Cassio,[6661]
    Cassio, Cassio![6661]

    _Iago._ O notable strumpet! Cassio, may you suspect
    Who they should be that have thus mangled you?[6662]

    _Cas._ No.                                                        80

    _Gra._ I am sorry to find you thus: I have been to seek you.[6663]

    _Iago._ Lend me a garter. So. O, for a chair,[6664]
    To bear him easily hence![6664]

    _Bian._ Alas, he faints! O Cassio, Cassio, Cassio!

    _Iago._ Gentlemen all, I do suspect this trash                    85
    To be a party in this injury.[6665][6666]
    Patience awhile, good Cassio. Come, come;[6665][6667]
    Lend me a light. Know we this face or no?[6665][6668]
    Alas, my friend and my dear countryman
    Roderigo? no:--yes, sure: O heaven! Roderigo.[6669]               90

    _Gra._ What, of Venice?[6670]

    _Iago._ Even he, sir: did you know him?

    _Gra._                                  Know him! ay.[6671]

    _Iago._ Signior Gratiano? I cry you gentle pardon;[6672]
    These bloody accidents must excuse my manners,
    That so neglected you.

    _Gra._                 I am glad to see you.                      95

    _Iago._ How do you, Cassio? O, a chair, a chair!

    _Gra._ Roderigo![6673]

    _Iago._ He, he, 'tis he. [_A chair brought in._] O, that's
            well said; the chair:[6674]
    Some good man bear him carefully from hence;
    I'll fetch the general's surgeon. [_To Bianca_] For you,
               mistress,[6675]                                       100
    Save you your labour. He that lies slain here, Cassio,[6676]
    Was my dear friend: what malice was between you?[6677]

    _Cas._ None in the world; nor do I know the man.[6678]

    _Iago._ [_To Bian._] What, look you pale? O, bear him out
                o' the air.  [_Cassio and Roderigo are borne off._[6679]
    Stay you, good gentlemen. Look you pale, mistress?[6680]         105
    Do you perceive the gastness of her eye?[6681]
    Nay, if you stare, we shall hear more anon.[6682]
    Behold her well; I pray you, look upon her:
    Do you see, gentlemen? nay, guiltiness will speak,[6683]
    Though tongues were out of use.[6683]                            110

                         _Enter_ EMILIA.[6684]

    _Emil._ 'Las, what's the matter? what's the matter, husband?[6685]

    _Iago._ Cassio hath here been set on in the dark[6686]
    By Roderigo, and fellows that are 'scaped:
    He's almost slain, and Roderigo dead.[6687]

    _Emil._ Alas, good gentleman! alas, good Cassio!                 115

    _Iago._ This is the fruit of whoring. Prithee, Emilia,[6688]
    Go know of Cassio where he supp'd to-night.
    What, do you shake at that?

    _Bian._ He supp'd at my house; but I therefore shake not.[6689]

    _Iago._ O, did he so? I charge you, go with me.                  120

    _Emil._ Fie, fie upon thee, strumpet![6690]

    _Bian._ I am no strumpet; but of life as honest
    As you that thus abuse me.

    _Emil._                    As I! foh! fie upon thee![6691]

    _Iago._ Kind gentlemen, let's go see poor Cassio dress'd.[6692]
    Come, mistress, you must tell's another tale.[6693]              125
    Emilia, run you to the citadel,[6694]
    And tell my lord and lady what hath happ'd![6695]
    Will you go on? I pray. [_Aside_] This is the night[6696]
    That either makes me or fordoes me quite.           [_Exeunt._[6697]


SCENE II. _A bedchamber in the castle_: DESDEMONA _in bed asleep; a
light burning_.[6698]

                            _Enter_ OTHELLO.

    _Oth._ It is the cause, it is the cause, my soul:
    Let me not name it to you, you chaste stars!
    It is the cause. Yet I'll not shed her blood,[6699]
    Nor scar that whiter skin of hers than snow
    And smooth as monumental alabaster.[6700]                          5
    Yet she must die, else she'll betray more men.[6701]
    Put out the light, and then put out the light:[6702]
    If I quench thee, thou flaming minister,
    I can again thy former light restore,
    Should I repent me: but once put out thy light,[6703]             10
    Thou cunning'st pattern of excelling nature,[6704]
    I know not where is that Promethean heat[6705]
    That can thy light relume. When I have pluck'd the rose,[6706]
    I cannot give it vital growth again,
    It must needs wither: I'll smell it on the tree.                  15

                                                   [_Kissing her._[6707]

    Ah, balmy breath, that dost almost persuade[6708]
    Justice to break her sword! One more, one more:[6709]
    Be thus when thou art dead, and I will kill thee,
    And love thee after: one more, and this the last:[6710]
    So sweet was ne'er so fatal. I must weep,                         20
    But they are cruel tears: this sorrow's heavenly;[6711]
    It strikes where it doth love. She wakes.[6712]

    _Des._ Who's there? Othello?

    _Oth._                       Ay, Desdemona.[6713]

    _Des._ Will you come to bed, my lord?

    _Oth._ Have you pray'd to-night, Desdemona?[6714]

    _Des_.                                           Ay, my lord.     25

    _Oth._ If you bethink yourself of any crime
    Unreconciled as yet to heaven and grace,
    Solicit for it straight.

    _Des._ Alas, my lord, what may you mean by that?[6715]

    _Oth._ Well, do it, and be brief; I will walk by:                 30
    I would not kill thy unprepared spirit;
    No; heaven forfend! I would not kill thy soul.[6716]

    _Des._ Talk you of killing?[6717]

    _Oth._ Ay, I do.[6717]

    _Des._ Then heaven have mercy on me![6717]                        35

    _Oth._ Amen, with all my heart![6717]

    _Des._ If you say so, I hope you will not kill me.[6718]

    _Oth._ Hum!

    _Des._ And yet I fear you; for you are fatal then[6719]
    When your eyes roll so: why I should fear I know not,[6720]       40
    Since guiltiness I know not; but yet I feel I fear.[6721]

    _Oth._ Think on thy sins.

    _Des._                    They are loves I bear to you.[6722]

    _Oth._ Ay, and for that thou diest.[6723]

    _Des._ That death's unnatural that kills for loving.[6724]
    Alas, why gnaw you so your nether lip?[6725]                      45
    Some bloody passion shakes your very frame:
    These are portents; but yet I hope, I hope,[6726]
    They do not point on me.

    _Oth._                   Peace, and be still!

    _Des._ I will so. What's the matter?[6727]

    _Oth._ That handkerchief which I so loved and gave thee[6728][6729]  50
    Thou gavest to Cassio.[6730]

    _Des._                 No, by my life and soul![6728]
    Send for the man, and ask him.[6728]

    _Oth._                         Sweet soul, take heed,[6731]
    Take heed of perjury; thou art on thy death-bed.[6731][6732]

    _Des._ Ay, but not yet to die.

    _Oth._                         Yes, presently:[6733]
    Therefore confess thee freely of thy sin;                         55
    For to deny each article with oath
    Cannot remove nor choke the strong conception[6734]
    That I do groan withal. Thou art to die.

    _Des._ Then Lord have mercy on me![6735]

    _Oth._                             I say, amen.

    _Des._  And have you mercy too! I never did[6736]                 60
    Offend you in my life; never loved Cassio[6736]
    But with such general warranty of heaven
    As I might love: I never gave him token.

    _Oth._ By heaven, I saw my handkerchief in 's hand.[6729][6737]
    O perjured woman! thou dost stone my heart,[6738]                 65
    And makest me call what I intend to do[6739]
    A murder, which I thought a sacrifice:
    I saw the handkerchief.[6729]

    _Des._                  He found it then;
    I never gave it him: send for him hither;
    Let him confess a truth.

    _Oth._                   He hath confess'd.[6740]                 70

    _Des._  What, my lord?

    _Oth._ That he hath used thee.[6741]

    _Des._                         How? unlawfully?

    _Oth._ Ay.

    _Des._ He will not say so.

    _Oth._                     No, his mouth is stopp'd;
    Honest Iago hath ta'en order for't.[6742]                         75

    _Des._ O, my fear interprets! what, is he dead?[6743]

    _Oth._ Had all his hairs been lives, my great revenge[6744]
    Had stomach for them all.[6744][6745]

    _Des._ Alas, he is betray'd, and I undone![6746]

    _Oth._ Out, strumpet! weep'st thou for him to my face?[6747]      80

    _Des._ O, banish me, my lord, but kill me not!

    _Oth._ Down, strumpet!

    _Des._ Kill me to-morrow; let me live to-night!

    _Oth._ Nay, if you strive,--[6748]

    _Des._ But half an hour!

    _Oth._                Being done, there is no pause.[6749][6750]  85

    _Des._ But while I say one prayer![6750]

    _Oth._                      It is too late. [_He stifles her._[6751]

    _Emil._ [_Within_] My lord, my lord! what, ho! my lord, my lord![6752]

    _Oth._ What noise is this? Not dead? not yet quite dead?[6753]
    I that am cruel am yet merciful;
    I would not have thee linger in thy pain:[6754]                   90
    So, so.[6754][6755]

    _Emil._ [_Within_] What, ho! my lord, my lord!

    _Oth._                                                   Who's there?

    _Emil._ [_Within_] O, good my lord, I would speak a
              word with you![6756][6757]

    _Oth._ Yes: 'tis Emilia. By and by. She's dead.
    'Tis like she comes to speak of Cassio's death.                   95
    The noise was here. Ha! no more moving?[6758][6759]
    Still as the grave. Shall she come in? were 't good?[6759]
    I think she stirs again. No. What's best to do?[6760]
    If she come in, she'll sure speak to my wife:
    My wife! my wife! what wife? I have no wife.[6761]               100
    O, insupportable! O heavy hour!
    Methinks it should be now a huge eclipse
    Of sun and moon, and that the affrighted globe
    Should yawn at alteration.[6762]

    _Emil._                   [_Within_] I do beseech you[6756][6763][6764]
    That I may speak with you, O, good my lord![6763][6765]          105

    _Oth._ I had forgot thee: O, come in, Emilia.[6766]
    Soft; by and by. Let me the curtains draw.
    Where art thou?                           [_Unlocks the door._[6767]

                         _Enter_ EMILIA.[6768]

                            What's the matter with thee now?

    _Emil._ O, my good lord, yonder's foul murders done![6769]

    _Oth._ What, now?[6770]                                          110

    _Emil._ But now, my lord.

    _Oth._ It is the very error of the moon;
    She comes more nearer earth than she was wont[6771]
    And makes men mad.

    _Emil._ Cassio, my lord, hath kill'd a young Venetian[6772][6773]  115
    Call'd Roderigo.[6772]

    _Oth._           Roderigo kill'd![6774]
    And Cassio kill'd![6774]

    _Emil._            No, Cassio is not kill'd.

    _Oth._ Not Cassio kill'd! then murder's out of tune,
    And sweet revenge grows harsh.

    _Des._ O, falsely, falsely murder'd!

    _Emil._                              Alas, what cry is that?[6775]  120

    _Oth._ That! what?

    _Emil._ Out, and alas! that was my lady's voice.[6776]
    Help! help, ho! help! O lady, speak again!
    Sweet Desdemona! O sweet mistress, speak!

    _Des._ A guiltless death I die.                                  125

    _Emil._ O, who hath done this deed?[6777]

    _Des._ Nobody; I myself. Farewell:
    Commend me to my kind lord: O, farewell!              [_Dies._[6778]

    _Oth._ Why, how should she be murder'd?[6779]

    _Emil._                                 Alas, who knows?

    _Oth._ You heard her say herself, it was not I.[6780]            130

    _Emil._ She said so: I must needs report the truth.[6781]

    _Oth._ She's like a liar gone to burning hell:[6782]
    'Twas I that kill'd her.

    _Emil._                  O, the more angel she,[6783]
    And you the blacker devil![6783]

    _Oth._ She turn'd to folly and she was a whore.                  135

    _Emil._ Thou dost belie her and thou art a devil.

    _Oth._ She was false as water.

    _Emil._                    Thou art rash as fire, to say[6784][6785]
    That she was false: O, she was heavenly true![6784]

    _Oth._ Cassio did top her; ask thy husband else.[6786]
    O, I were damn'd beneath all depth in hell,                      140
    But that I did proceed upon just grounds
    To this extremity. Thy husband knew it all.[6787]

    _Emil._ My husband![6788]

    _Oth._ Thy husband.

    _Emil._ That she was false to wedlock?                           145

    _Oth._ Ay, with Cassio. Nay, had she been true,[6789]
    If heaven would make me such another world
    Of one entire and perfect chrysolite,
    I'ld not have sold her for it.

    _Emil._ My husband!

    _Oth._              Ay, 'twas he that told me first:[6790]       150
    An honest man he is, and hates the slime
    That sticks on filthy deeds.[6791]

    _Emil._                      My husband!

    _Oth._ What needs this iteration, woman? I say thy husband.[6792]

    _Emil._ O mistress, villany hath made mocks with love![6793][6794]
    My husband say that she was false![6793][6795]

    _Oth._                             He, woman;[6793][6796]        155
    I say thy husband: dost understand the word?[6793][6796]
    My friend, thy husband, honest, honest Iago.[6793]

    _Emil._ If he say so, may his pernicious soul[6797]
    Rot half a grain a day! he lies to the heart:[6798]
    She was too fond of her most filthy bargain.                     160

    _Oth._ Ha![6799]

    _Emil._ Do thy worst:
    This deed of thine is no more worthy heaven
    Than thou wast worthy her.

    _Oth._                     Peace, you were best.[6800]

    _Emil._ Thou hast not half that power to do me harm[6801]        165
    As I have to be hurt. O gull! O dolt![6802]
    As ignorant as dirt! thou hast done a deed--[6803]
    I care not for thy sword; I'll make thee known,[6804]
    Though I lost twenty lives. Help! help, ho! help![6805]
    The Moor hath kill'd my mistress! Murder! murder!                170

          _Enter_ MONTANO, GRATIANO, IAGO, _and others_.[6806]

    _Mon._ What is the matter? How now, general![6807]

    _Emil._ O, are you come, Iago? you have done well,
    That men must lay their murders on your neck.[6808]

    _Gra._ What is the matter?[6809]

    _Emil._ Disprove this villain, if thou be'st a man:[6810]        175
    He says thou told'st him that his wife was false:
    I know thou didst not, thou'rt not such a villain.[6811]
    Speak, for my heart is full.

    _Iago._ I told him what I thought, and told no more[6812]
    Than what he found himself was apt and true.[6813]               180

    _Emil._ But did you ever tell him she was false?[6814]

    _Iago._ I did.

    _Emil._ You told a lie, an odious, damned lie;
    Upon my soul, a lie, a wicked lie!
    She false with Cassio! Did you say with Cassio?[6815][6816]      185

    _Iago._ With Cassio, mistress. Go to, charm your tongue.[6815][6817]

    _Emil._ I will not charm my tongue; I am bound to
              speak:[6815][6817][6818]
    My mistress here lies murder'd in her bed,--[6819][6820]

    _All._ O heavens forfend![6819][6821]

    _Emil._ And your reports have set the murder on.[6819][6821][6822]  190

    _Oth._ Nay, stare not, masters: it is true indeed.[6819][6821][6823]

    _Gra._'Tis a strange truth.[6819][6821]

    _Mon._ O monstrous act![6819][6821]

    _Emil._                 Villany, villany, villany![6819][6821]
    I think upon't: I think: I smell't: O villany![6819][6821][6824]
    I thought so then: I'll kill myself for grief:[6819][6821]       195
    O villany, villany![6819][6821]

    _Iago._ What, are you mad? I charge you, get you home.[6825]

    _Emil._ Good gentlemen, let me have leave to speak:
    'Tis proper I obey him, but not now.
    Perchance, Iago, I will ne'er go home.[6826]                     200

    _Oth._ O! O! O!                         [_Falling on the bed._[6827]

    _Emil._         Nay, lay thee down and roar;
    For thou hast kill'd the sweetest innocent
    That e'er did lift up eye.

    _Oth._                     [_Rising_] O, she was foul![6828]
    I scarce did know you, uncle: there lies your niece,
    Whose breath indeed these hands have newly stopp'd:              205
    I know this act shows horrible and grim.[6829]

    _Gra._ Poor Desdemona! I am glad thy father's dead:[6830]
    Thy match was mortal to him, and pure grief
    Shore his old thread in twain: did he live now,[6831]
    This sight would make him do a desperate turn,                   210
    Yea, curse his better angel from his side,
    And fall to reprobation.[6832]

    _Oth._ 'Tis pitiful; but yet Iago knows
    That she with Cassio hath the act of shame[6833]
    A thousand times committed; Cassio confess'd it:                 215
    And she did gratify his amorous works
    With that recognizance and pledge of love[6834]
    Which I first gave her; I saw it in his hand:
    It was a handkerchief, an antique token[6835][6836]
    My father gave my mother.                                        220

    _Emil._ O heaven! O heavenly powers![6837]

    _Iago._'Zounds! hold your peace.

    _Emil._                 'Twill out, 'twill out. I peace![6838][6839]
    No, I will speak as liberal as the north:[6839][6840]
    Let heaven and men and devils, let them all,[6841]
    All, all, cry shame against me, yet I'll speak.                  225

    _Iago._ Be wise, and get you home.[6842]

    _Emil._                            I will not.

                                          [_Iago offers to stab Emilia._

    _Gra._                                         Fie![6843]
    Your sword upon a woman![6843][6844]

    _Emil._ O thou dull Moor! that handkerchief thou
            speak'st of[6835][6845]
    I found by fortune and did give my husband;
    For often with a solemn earnestness,                             230
    More than indeed belong'd to such a trifle,
    He begg'd of me to steal it.[6846]

    _Iago._                      Villanous whore!

    _Emil._ She give it Cassio! no, alas, I found it,
    And I did give't my husband.[6847]

    _Iago._                      Filth, thou liest!

    _Emil._ By heaven, I do not, I do not, gentlemen.                235
    O murderous coxcomb! what should such a fool
    Do with so good a wife?

    _Oth._                  Are there no stones in heaven[6848]
    But what serve for the thunder? Precious villain!

                   [_He runs at Iago: Iago, from behind, stabs Emilia,
                                                       and exit._[6849]

    _Gra._ The woman falls; sure, he hath kill'd his wife.[6850]

    _Emil._ Ay, ay: O, lay me by my mistress' side.[6851]            240

    _Gra._ He's gone, but his wife's kill'd.

    _Mon._ 'Tis a notorious villain. Take you this weapon,[6852]
    Which I have here recover'd from the Moor:[6853]
    Come, guard the door without; let him not pass,[6854]
    But kill him rather. I'll after that same villain,               245
    For 'tis a damned slave.

                            [_Exeunt all but Othello and Emilia._[6855]

    _Oth._                   I am not valiant neither,
    But every puny whipster gets my sword.
    But why should honour outlive honesty?
    Let it go all.

    _Emil._        What did thy song bode, lady?[6856]
    Hark, canst thou hear me? I will play the swan,[6856]            250
    And die in music. [_Singing_] Willow, willow, willow.[6856][6857]
    Moor, she was chaste; she loved thee, cruel Moor;
    So come my soul to bliss, as I speak true;
    So speaking as I think, I die, I die.                 [_Dies._[6858]

    _Oth._ I have another weapon in this chamber;                    255
    It is a sword of Spain, the ice-brook's temper.--[6859]
    O, here it is. Uncle, I must come forth.

    _Gra._[_Within_] If thou attempt it, it will cost thee dear:[6860]
    Thou hast no weapon, and perforce must suffer.

    _Oth._ Look in upon me then, and speak with me,[6861]            260
    Or, naked as I am, I will assault thee.

                       _Re-enter_ GRATIANO.[6862]

    _Gra._ What is the matter?

    _Oth._                     Behold, I have a weapon;[6863]
    A better never did itself sustain
    Upon a soldier's thigh: I have seen the day[6864]
    That with this little arm and this good sword                    265
    I have made my way through more impediments[6865]
    Than twenty times your stop: but, O vain boast![6866]
    Who can control his fate? 'tis not so now.
    Be not afraid, though you do see me weapon'd;[6867]
    Here is my journey's end, here is my butt[6867]                  270
    And very sea-mark of my utmost sail.[6867][6868]
    Do you go back dismay'd? 'tis a lost fear:[6867]
    Man but a rush against Othello's breast,[6867]
    And he retires. Where should Othello go?[6867]
    Now, how dost thou look now? O ill-starr'd wench![6867][6869]    275
    Pale as thy smock! when we shall meet at compt,[6870]
    This look of thine will hurl my soul from heaven,
    And fiends will snatch at it. Cold, cold, my girl!
    Even like thy chastity. O cursed slave![6871][6872]
    Whip me, ye devils,[6871][6873]                                  280
    From the possession of this heavenly sight!
    Blow me about in winds! roast me in sulphur![6874]
    Wash me in steep-down gulfs of liquid fire![6875]
    O Desdemona! Desdemona! dead![6876]
    Oh! Oh! Oh![6876]                                                285

  _Enter_ LODOVICO, MONTANO, CASSIO _carried in a chair, and_ Officers
                     _with_ IAGO, _prisoner_.[6877]

    _Lod._ Where is this rash and most unfortunate man?[6878]

    _Oth._ That's he that was Othello: here I am.[6879]

    _Lod._ Where is that viper? bring the villain forth.[6880]

    _Oth._ I look down towards his feet; but that's a fable.
    If that thou be'st a devil, I cannot kill thee. [_Wounds Iago._[6881]  290

    _Lod._ Wrench his sword from him.

    _Iago._                           I bleed, sir, but not kill'd.[6882]

    _Oth._ I am not sorry neither: I'ld have thee live;
    For, in my sense, 'tis happiness to die.

    _Lod._ O thou Othello, that wert once so good,[6883]
    Fall'n in the practice of a damned slave,[6884]                  295
    What shall be said to thee?[6885]

    _Oth._                      Why, any thing:
    An honourable murderer, if you will;
    For nought did I in hate, but all in honour.[6886]

    _Lod._ This wretch hath part confess'd his villany:
    Did you and he consent in Cassio's death?                        300

    _Oth._ Ay.

    _Cas._ Dear general, I never gave you cause.[6887]

    _Oth._ I do believe it, and I ask your pardon.[6888]
    Will you, I pray, demand that demi-devil[6889]
    Why he hath thus ensnared my soul and body?[6890]                305

    _Iago._ Demand me nothing; what you know, you know:
    From this time forth I never will speak word.

    _Lod._ What, not to pray?

    _Gra._                    Torments will ope your lips.

    _Oth._ Well, thou dost best.

    _Lod._ Sir, you shall understand what hath befall'n,[6891]       310
    Which, as I think, you know not. Here is a letter[6892]
    Found in the pocket of the slain Roderigo,
    And here another: the one of them imports[6893]
    The death of Cassio to be undertook[6894]
    By Roderigo.[6894]

    _Oth._ O villain![6895]                                          315

    _Cas._            Most heathenish and most gross!

    _Lod._ Now here's another discontented paper,
    Found in his pocket too; and this, it seems,
    Roderigo meant to have sent this damned villain;
    But that, belike, Iago in the interim[6896]                      320
    Came in and satisfied him.

    _Oth._                     O the pernicious caitiff![6897]
    How came you, Cassio, by that handkerchief[6898]
    That was my wife's?[6899]

    _Cas._              I found it in my chamber:
    And he himself confess'd but even now[6900]
    That there he dropp'd it for a special purpose                   325
    Which wrought to his desire.

    _Oth._                       O fool! fool! fool!

    _Cas._ There is besides in Roderigo's letter,
    How he upbraids Iago, that he made him[6901]
    Brave me upon the watch; whereon it came
    That I was cast: and even but now he spake[6902]                 330
    After long seeming dead, Iago hurt him,
    Iago set him on.

    _Lod._ You must forsake this room, and go with us:
    Your power and your command is taken off,
    And Cassio rules in Cyprus. For this slave,[6903]                335
    If there be any cunning cruelty
    That can torment him much and hold him long,
    It shall be his. You shall close prisoner rest,
    Till that the nature of your fault be known
    To the Venetian state. Come, bring away.[6904]                   340

    _Oth._ Soft you; a word or two before you go.[6905]
    I have done the state some service, and they know't.[6906]
    No more of that. I pray you, in your letters,
    When you shall these unlucky deeds relate,
    Speak of me as I am; nothing extenuate,[6907]                    345
    Nor set down aught in malice: then must you speak[6908]
    Of one that loved not wisely but too well;
    Of one not easily jealous but, being wrought,[6909]
    Perplex'd in the extreme; of one whose hand,[6910]
    Like the base Indian, threw a pearl away[6911]                   350
    Richer than all his tribe; of one whose subdued eyes,[6912]
    Albeit unused to the melting mood,
    Drop tears as fast as the Arabian trees[6913]
    Their medicinal gum. Set you down this;[6914]
    And say besides, that in Aleppo once,                            355
    Where a malignant and a turban'd Turk[6915]
    Beat a Venetian and traduced the state,[6916]
    I took by the throat the circumcised dog[6917]
    And smote him, thus.                         [_Stabs himself._[6918]

    _Lod._ O bloody period!

    _Gra._                  All that's spoke is marr'd.[6919]        360

    _Oth._ I kiss'd thee ere I kill'd thee: no way but this,[6920]
    Killing myself, to die upon a kiss.

                                   [_Falls on the bed, and dies._[6921]

    _Cas._ This did I fear, but thought he had no weapon;
    For he was great of heart.

    _Lod._                     [_To Iago_] O Spartan dog,[6922]
    More fell than anguish, hunger, or the sea!                      365
    Look on the tragic loading of this bed;[6923]
    This is thy work: the object poisons sight;[6924]
    Let it be hid. Gratiano, keep the house,
    And seize upon the fortunes of the Moor,[6925]
    For they succeed on you. To you, lord governor,[6926]            370
    Remains the censure of this hellish villain,[6927]
    The time, the place, the torture: O, enforce it!
    Myself will straight aboard, and to the state
    This heavy act with heavy heart relate.             [_Exeunt._[6928]

FOOTNOTES:

[6611] ACT V. SCENE I.] Actus. 5. Q₁. Actus Quintus. Scena Prima. Ff.
Actus 5. Scæna 1. Q₂ Q₃.

Cyprus. A street.] The Street. Rowe. A Street before the Palace.
Theobald.

[6612] _Here ... come:_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_bulk_] _bulke_ Qq. _barke_ F₁ F₂. _bark_ F₃ F₄. _balk_ Singer, ed. 2
(Collier MS.) _bulwark_ Anon. conj.

[6613] _on_] Ff. _of_ Qq.

[6614] _most_] _more_ Q₂ Q₃.

[6615] _at thy hand_] _at thy side_ or _at thy left_ Anon. conj.

_be bold_] Qq F₁. _behold_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

_stand_] _sword_ Q₁.

[Retires.] Retires to a little Distance. Capell. om. Qq Ff.

[6616] _deed_] _dead_ Q₁.

[6617] _And_] om. Pope.

_hath_] Ff. _has_ Qq.

[6618] [Stands apart. Theobald. Goes and stands apart. Hanmer. Going to
his Stand. Capell.

[6619] _I have_] _I've_ Pope.

_rubb'd_] _fubb'd_ Becket conj.

_quat_] _gnat_ Q₁. _knot_ Theobald. _quab_ Hanmer. _quail_ Upton conj.

[6620] _angry. Now, whether_] Ff. _angry now: whether_ Q₁. _angry, now,
whether_ Q₂. _angry, now whether_ Q₃.

[6621] _gain_] F₃ F₄. _gaine_ F₁ F₂. _game_ Qq.

[6622] _Of_] Ff. _For_ Qq.

[6623] _hath_] Ff. _has_ Qq.

[6624] _much_] om. Q₁.

[6625] _Be't so._] _be't so_, Qq. _But so,_ Ff. _Be it so,_ Pope.

_hear_] F₃ F₄. _heare_ Qq F₂. _heard_ F₁.

[Exit Jago. Rowe.

[6626] _gait_] Johnson. _gate_ Qq Ff.

[Makes ... Cassio.] He runs at Cassio, and wounds him. Rowe. starting
from his Post, and making a Pass at him. Capell.

[6627] _mine_] Ff. _my_ Qq.

[6628] _know'st_] _think'st_ Q₁.

[6629] [Draws....] Capell. Fight, and both fall. Rowe (after _slain_).
om. Qq Ff.

[Iago ... exit.] Fight. Iago cuts Cassion behind in the Leg, and exit.
Then Rod. and Cassio fall. Theobald. om. Qq Ff.

[6630] _I ... murder!_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_I am_] _I'm_ Pope.

_maim'd_] _maind_ Q₁.

_Help_] _light_ Qq.

_murder! murder!_] Once only in Q₂ Q₃.

[Falls.] Falling too. Capell (after _ever_). om. Qq Ff.

[6631] Enter Othello.] Qq Ff. Enter Othello, above at a window. Rowe.
Enter Othello, at a Distance. Capell.

[6632] SCENE II. Pope.

[6633] _It is_] Ff. _Harke tis_ Q₁ Q₃. _Harke, tis_ Q₂.

[6634] _unblest fate hies:_] _unblest fate highes:_ Ff. _fates hies
apace;_ Qq.

[6635] _Forth of]_ Qq. _For of_ F₁. _For off_ F₂ F₃ F₄. _From off_ Pope.

_are_] _have_ Hanmer (ed. 2).

[6636] _bed lust-stain'd_] _bed-lest-stain'd_ F₃ F₄.

[Exit.] Q₂ Q₃. Ex. Q₁. Exit Othello. Ff.

Enter....] Qq Ff. Enter ... at a distance. Theobald.

[6637] SCENE III. Pope.

_What ... murder!_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[6638] _cry_] Qq. _voyce_ F₁ F₂. _voice_ F₃ F₄.

[6639] _groan_] F₃ F₄. _groane_ F₁ F₂. _grones_ Qq.

_it is a_] Qq. _'Tis_ Ff.

[6640] _in to_] Capell. _into_ Qq Ff.

[6641] _come?_] Theobald. _come,_ Qq. _come:_ Ff.

[6642] _Hark_] _Hark, hark_ Keightley.

[6643] Re-enter....] Dyce (after line 47). Enter Iago with a light. Qq
(after line 45). Enter Iago. Ff (after line 45). Enter Jago, in his
Shirt. Rowe (after line 45). Enter Iago, in his Shirt, with a Light and
Sword. Theobald (after line 45).

[6644] _light_] Ff. _lights_ Qq.

[6645] _Who's ... murder?_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_on_] Qq F₁. _out_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

_murder?_] _murder thus?_ Collier MS.

[6646] _We_] Ff. _I_ Qq.

_Did_] Qq. _Do_ F₁ F₃ F₄. _Doe_ F₂.

[6647] _heaven's_] _heavens_ Qq. _heaven_ Ff.

[6648] _Iago?_] Ff. _Iago,_ Qq.

_I am_] _I'm_ Pope.

[6649] _O ... this?_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_me,_] Q₂ F₂ F₃ F₄. _mee,_ F₁. _my_ Q₁.

[6650] _that one_] Ff. _the one_ Qq.

[6651] [To ... Gratiano.] Theobald.

[6652] _here_] Qq. _there_ Ff.

[6653] _them_] Ff. _em_ Qq.

[Stabs Roderigo.] Thrusts him in Q₂ Q₃. om. Q₁ Ff. Jago Stabs him.
Rowe. Iago sets down his Light; makes towards Roderigo in the dark, and
stabs him. Capell.

[6654] _dog!_] _dog,--o, o, o._ Qq.

[giues up yᵉ gost. Anon. MS. See note (IV). Dies. Hanmer.

[6655] _Kill ... thieves?_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_men_] _him_ Q₁.

_these_] Ff. _those_ Qq.

[counterfeiting a Search. Capell.

[6656] _Lodovico?_] F₁. _Lodovico._ The rest.

[6657] _Cassio!_] _Cassio?_ F₁ F₂. _Cassio._ The rest.

[6658] _is't_] Ff. (_ist_ F₂). _is it_ Qq.

[6659] SCENE IV. Pope.

[6660] _cried!_] _cry'd?_ Ff. _cried._ Q₁. _cried?_ Q₂ Q₃.

[6661] _O my ... Cassio!_] Prose in Qq. Two lines, the first ending
_deere Cassio_, in Ff. Capell ends the first line at _sweet Cassio_,
reading with Qq.

_my sweet ... Cassio!_] _O my sweete Cassio, Cassio, Cassio._ Qq.

[6662] _have thus_] Ff. _thus have_ Qq.

[6663] _I am ... you._] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[6664] Iago. _Lend ... hence!_] Omitted in Q₁. Prose in Q₂ Q₃.

[6665] _To ... no?_] Divided as in Ff. Two lines, the first ending
_Cassio,_ in Q₁; three, ending _Cassio; ... light: ... no?_ in Q₂ Q₃.

[6666] _be a party_] _beare a part_ Qq.

_injury_] om. Q₁.

[6667] _Come, come;_] Omitted in Q₁.

[rising from him. Capell.

[6668] [viewing Roderigo. Capell.

[6669] _O heaven!_] _O heaven_ Q₁. _Yes, 'tis_ F₁. _yes, tis_ Q₂ Q₃.
_Yea, tis_ F₂. _Yea, 'tis_ F₃ F₄.

[6670] _What_] _Roderigo? what_ Capell conj.

[6671] _ay_] Hanmer. _I_ Qq Ff. _Ah!_ Rowe.

[6672] _you_] Qq. _your_ Ff.

[6673] _Roderigo!_] _Roderigo?_ Q₂ Q F₂ F₃. _Rodorigo?_ F₁ F₄.
_Roderigo._ Q₁.

[6674] _He ... chair:_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_He, he_] Ff. _He,_ Qq.

_the_] Ff. _a_ Qq.

[A chair....] Malone (after _chair_). Enter Some with a Chair. Capell.
om. Ff.

[6675] _general's_] _general_ F₄.

[To Bianca.] Johnson.

[6676] _Cassio,_] om. Hanmer.

[6677] _between_] _betwixt_ Qq.

[6678] _man._] Qq. _man:_ F₄. _man?_ F₁ F₂ F₃.

[6679] [To Bian.] Johnson.

[Cassio....] Cassio is born off; and the Body of Rod. Capell.

[6680] _gentlemen_] Ff. _gentlewoman_ Qq.

[To Bianca. Rowe.

[6681] _gastness_] _ieastures_ Q₁ Q₂. _jestures_ Q₃. _gestures_ Q
(1695).

[6682] _if you stare_] Ff. _an you stirre_ Q₁ Q₂. _an you stirr_ Q₃.
_if you stay_ Anon. conj.

_hear_] _have_ Qq.

[6683] _Do ... use._] Divided as in Ff. The first line ends
_guiltinesse_ in Qq.

[6684] Enter Emilia.] Enter Em. Q₁. Enter Emi. Q₂ Q₃. Omitted in Ff.

[6685] SCENE V. Pope.

_'Las, what's ... what's ... husband?_] Qq. _Alas, what is.... What
is ... husband?_ Ff, reading as two lines.

[6686] _hath_] Ff. _has_ Qq.

_here_] om. Q (1695). _there_ Theobald.

[6687] _dead_] Qq. _quite dead_ Ff. _quite_ Anon. conj.

[6688] _fruit_] _fruite_ Qq. _fruits_ Ff.

_Prithee_] _Pray_ Q₁.

[6689] _He_] _Why, you well know, He_ Steevens conj.

[6690] _Fie, fie_] Q₁. _Fie_ Q₂ Q₃. _Oh fie_ Ff.

[6691] _foh!_] _fough,_ Q₁. _now_ Q₂ Q₃. om. Ff.

[6692] _Kind ... dress'd._] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_go_] om. Pope.

[6693] _tell's_] _tel's_ F₁. _tels_ F₂.

[6694] _you_] om. Pope.

[6695] _hath_] Ff. _has_ Qq.

[6696] _on? I pray._] _on? I pray:_ Q₂ Q₃. _on, I pray,_ Q₁. _on
afore?_ Ff.

[Aside] First marked by Steevens (1778).

[6697] _makes_] _markes_ Q₁.

[Exeunt.] Qq Ff. Exeunt, Iago following. Theobald.

[6698] SCENE II.] SCENE VI. Pope.

A bedchamber ... a light burning. Enter Othello.] Steevens (1773),
substantially. A bedchamber.... Enter Othello, with a light. Capell.
Enter Othello with a light. Q₁. Enter Othello with a light, and
Desdemona in her bed. Q₂ Q₃. Enter Othello, and Desdemona in her bed.
Ff. A Bed-chamber: Desdemona is discover'd asleep in her Bed. Enter
Othello. Rowe. A Bed-chamber.... Enter Othello, with a light and a
sword. Pope.

[6699] [taking off his Sword, and laying it by. Capell.

[6700] _as_] _and_ Pope (ed. 2).

_alabaster_] F₄. _alablaster_ The rest.

[Lays down the sword. Theobald.

[6701] _more men_] _me more_ Hunter conj.

[6702] _Put ... light:_] Qq Ff. See note (XII).

[6703] _me_] om. Pope.

_thy light_] Ff. _thine_ Qq.

[going towards his Wife. Capell.

[6704] _cunning'st_] _cunning_ Q₁.

[6705] _heat_] _fire_ Capell. conj.

[6706] _That ... rose,_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_thy light_] _the light_ Seymour conj. _that light_ Anon. conj.

_relume_] _re-lume_ F₄. _re-Lume_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _returne_ Q₁. _relumine_ Q₂
Q₃.

[Sets down the taper. Theobald. Sets down the Candle, not putting it
out. Hanmer.

_the rose_] Qq. _thy rose_ Ff.

[6707] _must needs_] Q₂ Q₃. _must needes_ Q₁. _needs must_ Ff (_needes_
F₂).

_it_] Qq. _thee_ Ff.

[Kissing her.] kisses her. Q₂ Q₃. om. Q₁ Ff.

[6708] _Ah,_] _A_ Qq. _Oh_ Ff.

_dost almost_] Ff. _doth almost_ Qq. _almost dost_ Jennens.

[6709] _Justice_] _Iustice her selfe_ Qq.

_sword! One ... more:_] _sword. One more, one more:_ Ff. _sword once
more,_ Q₁. _sword: one more;_ Q₂ Q₃. _sword.--Once more--_ Jennens.

[6710] _one_] _once_ Q₁.

_and this_] Qq. _and that's_ Ff. _that's_ Pope.

[He kisses her. Q₁.

[6711] _sorrow's_] _sorrowes_ Q₁. _sorrows_ F₂ F₃.

[6712] _where_] _when_ Q₁.

_doth_ Ff. _does_ Qq.

_She wakes._] A stage-direction, Anon. conj., reading _It ... Othello?_
as one line.

[6713] _Ay,_] Rowe. _I,_ Qq F₃ F₄. _I_ F₁ F₂.

[6714] _pray'd_] Ff. _prayed_ Qq.

_Desdemona_] Qq F₃ F₄. _Desdemon_ F₁ F₂.

[6715] _Alas ... that?_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_Alas_] Qq. _Alacke_ F₁ F₂. _Alack_ F₃ F₄.

_may_] Q₁ Ff. _doe_ Q₂ Q₃.

[6716] _heaven_] Qq. _heavens_ Ff.

[6717] _Talk ... heart!_] Arranged as in Qq Ff. Two lines, the first
ending _heaven,_ in Capell.

[6718] _so_] om. F₁.

[6719] _you are_] Q₁. _you're_ Ff. _y'are_ Q₂ Q₃.

[6720] _When ... not,_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[6721] _guiltiness_] _guilt_ Pope.

_but_] om. Pope.

[6722] _They are_] _They're_ Pope.

_loves_] Qq F₁. _love_ F₂ F₃ F₄.

_I bear_] _to beare_ Q₃.

[6723] _Ay,_] om. Qq.

[6724] _unnatural ... loving._] _unnatural; what! kill for loving!_
Hanmer.

[6725] _nether lip_] _neather lip_ Qq. _nether-lip_ Ff.

[6726] _I hope, I hope_] Ff. _I hope_ Qq.

[6727] _will so_] _will, so_ Q₁.

[6728] _That ... ask him._] Divided as in Qq. Four lines, ending
_handkerchiefe ... Cassio ... man, ... him,_ in Ff.

[6729] _handkerchief_] _hankercher_ Q₁.

[6730] _to_] om. F₃ F₄.

[6731] _Sweet ... perjury;_] Divided as by Capell. One line in Qq Ff.

[6732] _thou art_] _thou'rt now_ Seymour conj.

[6733] _Yes_] Qq. om. Ff.

[6734] _conception_] _conceit_ Q₁.

[6735] _Then Lord_] Qq. _O Heaven_ Ff.

[6736] _I never ... Cassio_] Divided as in Ff. One line in Qq.

[6737] _in's_] F₁ F₃ F₄. _in his_ Qq. _ins_ F₂.

[6738] _my_] _thy_ Q₁.

[6739] _makest_] _makst_ Q₂ Q₃. _makes_ F₁.

[6740] _Let_] _And let_ Q₁.

_hath_] Ff. _has_ Qq.

[6741] _hath used thee._] _hath us'd thee._ Ff. _hath--vsde thee._ Q₂
Q₃. _hath--vds death._ Q₁.

[6742] _for't_] _fort_ F₂.

[6743] _O, ... interprets!_] _Oh, my feare interprets._ Ff. _My feare
interprets then,--_ Qq. _My fear interprets. Oh!_ Hanmer.

[6744] _my ... all._] Divided as in Ff. One line in Qq.

[6745] _them_] Ff. _'em_ Q₁. _em_ Q₂ Q₃.

[6746] _I_] _I'm_ Hanmer.

[6747] _Out_] _O_ Qq.

_weep'st_] _weepest_ Qq.

[taking up a Pillow. Capell.

[6748] _if_] Ff. _an_ Qq.

_strive,--_] _strive--_ Theobald. _strive._ Qq Ff.

[6749] _Being ... pause._] As in Ff Q₂ Q₃. Capell divides the line at
_done._

[6750] Oth. _Being ... pause._ Des.] Omitted in Q₁.

[6751] _It is too_] Ff. _Tis too_ Q₁. _Tis to_ Q₂ Q₃.

[He stifles her.] Q₂ Q₃ (opposite _prayer!_). He stifles her. Q₁.
Smothers her. Ff. Attempts to smother her. Pope.

Here Q₁ inserts: Des. _O Lord, Lord, Lord._ See note (XIII).

[6752] Emil. [Within]. Emillia calls within. Em. Qq (calles Q₂ Q₃).
Æmilia at the doore. Æm. Ff.

SCENE VII. Pope.

_My ... lord!_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[6753] _noise_] Ff. _voyce_ Qq.

[6754] _I would ... so._] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

[6755] [Stabbing her. Rann.

[Within] Ff. om. Qq.

[6756] [Within] Malone. om. Qq Ff.

[6757] _good my_] _my good_ F₃ F₄.

_I would_] Ff. _I'de_ Qq.

[6758] _here_] Q₁. _heere_ Q₂ Q₃. _high_ Ff.

[6759] _moving? Still_] _moving! still! Still_ Seymour conj. _moving?
still, Still_ S. Walker conj.

[6760] _best to do_] _the best_ Qq.

[6761] _what wife?_] _my wife;_ Q₁.

_have_] Ff. _ha_ Qq.

[6762] _Should_] Qq. _Did_ Ff.

_yawn at_] _yawn out_ Mason conj.

_alteration._] _alteration--_ Rowe.

[6763] _I do ... lord!_] _Good my lord, I do beseech you I may speak
with you._ Capell.

[6764] _do_] om. Pope.

[6765] _That_] om. Qq, reading _I ... lord_ as one line.

_O_] om. Q₁.

[6766] _forgot_] _forgotten_ Q₂ Q₃.

_O_] om. Q₂ Q₃.

[6767] [Unlocks the door.] Theobald (after _now?_). Draws them, and
then opens the Door. Capell. om. Qq Ff.

[6768] Enter....] As in Dyce. After _draw_ in Qq. After _now?_ in Ff.

[6769] _my good_] _good my_ Steevens (1793).

_murders_] _murder_ Theobald.

[6770] _What,_] Q₁. _What?_ Ff Q₂ Q₃.

[6771] _nearer_] Ff. _neere the_ Qq.

[6772] _Cassio ... Roderigo._] Divided as in Qq. Two lines, the first
ending _kill'd,_ in Ff.

[6773] _hath_] Ff. _has_ Qq.

[6774] _Roderigo ... Cassio kill'd._] As in Capell. One line in Qq Ff.

[6775] _murder'd_] Ff. _murdered_ Qq.

_Alas_] _O Lord_ Q₁. _Ahlas_ Q₂.

[6776] _that was_] Ff. _it is_ Q₁. _it was_ Q₂ Q₃.

[6777] _hath_] Ff. _has_ Qq.

[6778] [Dies.] She dies. Qq. om. Ff.

[6779] _murder'd_] _murdered_ Qq.

[6780] _heard_] Qq. _heare_ F₁ F₂. _hear_ F₃ F₄.

[6781] _the truth_] Ff. _a truth_ Qq.

[6782] _burning hell_] _burne in hell_ Q₃.

[6783] _O ... devil!_] Divided as in Qq. Prose in Ff.

[6784] _Thou ... true!_] Divided as in Ff. The first line ends _fire_
in Qq.

[6785] _art rash_] _as rash_ Q₁.

[6786] _top_] _tup_ Pope (ed. 2).

[6787] _extremity_] _extreme_ Steevens conj.

[6788] _My husband!_] _My husband?_ Q₁ Ff. _My husband:_ Q₂ Q₃.

[6789] Capell, reading with Ff, and Steevens (1793), reading with Qq,
end the lines _Cassio ... true._

_Ay, with_] _Ay, and with_ Keightley.

_Nay_] Qq. om. Ff.

_true_] _but true_ Collier MS.

[6790] _me first_] Qq. _me on her first_ Ff.

[6791] _on_] _one_ Q₃.

[6792] _What ... husband._] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_iteration, woman? I_] _iteration woman? I_ Pope. _iteration? woman, I_
Qq. _itterance, woman? I_ Ff.

[6793] Emil. _O ... Iago._] Omitted in Q₁.

[6794] _O ... love!_] One line in Q₂ Q₃. Two in Ff.

_hath_] _had_ F₄. _has_ Rowe.

[6795] _that_] Q₂ Q₃. om. Ff.

[6796] _He ... word?_] Divided as in Ff. One line in Q₂ Q₃.

[6797] _say_] _says_ Theobald.

[6798] _to the heart_] _o' th' heart_ Johnson.

[6799] [looking towards her Sword. Capell, corrected to 'his Sword' in
Errata. Threatening her. Collier (Collier MS.)

[6800] [threat'ning her with it. Capell.

[6801] _that_] Ff. _the_ Qq.

[6802] _be hurt_] _bear hurt_ Hanmer. _hurt thee_ Anon. MS. (pencil).
See note (IV).

[6803] _thou hast_] _thou'st_ Pope.

_deed--_] Qq. _deed_ Ff.

[6804] _I ... sword_] Put in a parenthesis in Ff.

_sword_] _word_ F₄.

_known_] _know_ Qq.

[6805] _ho! help!_] _O, helpe;_ Qq.

[6806] _hath_] _has_ Qq.

Gratiano,] Gragantio, Q₂ Q₃.

and others.] Qq. om. Ff.

[6807] SCENE VIII. Pope.

[staying him. Capell.

[6808] _murders_] _murder_ Qq.

[6809] Gra.] All. Q₁.

[6810] _Disprove this villain_] _Disprove it, villain_ Capell.
_Disprove this villany_ Rann (Capell conj.)

[6811] _thou'rt_] Ff. _thou art_ Qq.

[6812] _I ... more_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[6813] _Than_] _But_ Capell.

[6814] _But ... false?_] One line in Qq. Two, the first ending _him,_
in Ff.

[6815] _She ... speak:_] Three lines in Qq. Six in Ff.

[6816] _false_] _was false_ Q₃.

[6817] _charm_] _clam_ Johnson conj. _chain_ Anon. conj.

[6818] _I am_] _I'm_ Pope.

[6819] _My ... villany!_] Omitted in Q₁.

[6820] _here lies_] _lies here_ Pope.

_murder'd_] _murther'd_ Pope. _murdered_ Q₂ Q₃. _murthered_ Ff.

_bed,--_] Dyce. _bed,_ Q₃. _bed._ The rest.

[6821] All. _O heavens ... villany!_] Put in the margin by Pope.

[6822] _murder_] F₁ F₂ Q₃. _murther_ F₃ F₄. _murderer_ Q₂.

[6823] _Nay ... indeed._] One line in Q₂ Q₃. Two in Ff.

[6824] _smell't: O villany_] _smell a villany_ Q₂ Q₃.

[6825] _What, ... home._] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[6826] _Perchance_] Q₁ Ff. _Perhaps_ Q₂ Q₃.

[6827] _O! O! O!_] Four times in Capell.

[Falling....] Oth. fals on the bed. Qq (falls Q₂ Q₃). Omitted in Ff.
hanging over his Wife. Capell. Falling on the ground. Collier MS.

[6828] [Rising] Theobald. om. Qq Ff. Starting up. Collier MS.

[6829] _horrible_] Ff. _terrible_ Qq.

[6830] _Poor ... dead_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_Desdemona_] Qq F₃ F₄. _Desdemon_ F₁ F₂.

_I am_] _I'm_ Pope.

[6831] _in twain_] _atwane_ Q₁.

[6832] _reprobation_] Qq. _reprobance_ Ff.

[6833] _hath_] Q₁ Ff. _had_ Q₂ Q₃.

[6834] _that_] _the_ Q₁.

[6835] _handkerchief_] _hankercher_ Q₁.

[6836] _a_] _an_ Pope.

_antique_] Qq F₁ F₂. _antick_ F₃ F₄.

[6837] _O ... powers!_] _O God, O heavenly God._ Q₁.

[6838] _'Zounds_] _Zouns_ Q₁. _Come_ The rest.

_'Twill out, 'twill out._] _Twill out, twill:_ Q₁.

[6839] _I peace! No,_] _I peace? No,_ Ff. _I hold my peace sir, no,_
Qq, ending the line _no_.

[6840] _I ... north_] Ff. _I ... air_ Pope. _I ... wind_ Collier MS.
_I'le be in speaking, liberall as the ayre_ Q₁. _Ile be in speaking,
liberall as the north_ Q₂ Q₃.

[6841] _them_] Ff. _em_ Qq.

[6842] [Iago....] Jago offers to stab his wife. Rowe. om. Qq Ff. Iago
strikes his wife with a sword. Anon. MS. See note (IV).

[6843] _Fie ... woman!_] Divided as by Capell. One line in Qq Ff.

[6844] [to Iago, seeing him about to draw it. Capell.

[6845] _O ... of_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_of_] Ff. _on_ Qq.

[6846] _steal it_] F₄. _steale it_ Qq. _steale't_ F₁ F₂. _steal't_ F₃.

[They hold him. Collier (ed. 2).

[6847] _give_] Ff. _gave_ Qq.

_no_] om. F₃ F₄.

_found_] _find_ Q₃.

[6848] _wife_] Ff. _woman_ Qq.

_stones_] _stores_ Anon. MS. (pencil). See note (IV).

[6849] _But ... Precious_] _For what then serves the thunder? Precious_
Warburton. _What serves the thunder for? Pernicious_ Anon. MS.
(pencil). See note (IV).

_But ... villain!_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_serve_] F₄. _serves_ The rest.

_Precious_] Ff. _pretious_ Q₁. _pernitious_ Q₂ Q₃.

[He ... exit.] Edd. (Globe ed.) The Moore runnes at Iago. Iago kils his
wife. Qq (runs Q₂ Q₃, kills Q₂ Q₃), after _woman?_ line 237. Omitted in
Ff. Jago breaks through and wounds his Wife, then runs out. Rowe, after
_wife?_ line 237. Iago stabs his Wife suddenly, and runs off. Capell.
Othello offers to stab Iago, but is disarmed by Montano: Iago stabs
Emilia, and then runs out. Dyce (ed. 2).

[6850] _The ... wife._] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[6851] [Exit Iago. Qq.

[6852] _you this_] Ff. _your_ Qq. _this_ Pope.

[giving Gra. a sword. Capell.

[6853] _have here recover'd_] Pope (ed. 2). _have here recovered_ Qq.
_have recover'd_ Ff. _recover'd have here_ Pope (ed. 1). _have now
recover'd_ Collier MS. See note (XIV).

[6854] _Come, guard_] _Some guard_ Theobald conj. (withdrawn).

[6855] [Exeunt ... Emilia.] Edd. Exit Mont. and Gratiano. Qq. Exit. Ff.
Exit Montano. Knight.

SCENE IX. Pope.

[6856] _What ... willow._] Omitted in Q₁.

[6857] [Singing] Dyce. om. Qq Ff.

_Willow, willow, willow._] In italics in Qq Ff.

[6858] _I die, I die_] Qq. _alas, I dye_ Ff (_die_ F₃ F₄).

[Dies.] She dies. Qq. om. Ff.

[6859] _It is_] Qq. _It was_ Ff.

_the ice-brook's_] _the Ice brookes_ F₁ F₂. _the Ice brooks_ F₃ F₄.
_the Isebrookes_ Qq. _the Ebro's_ Pope. _'tis ebroes_ Blackstone conj.

[6860] Gra. [Within] Gra. within. Gra. Qq. Gra. Ff.

[6861] _with me_] Ff. _to me_ Qq.

[6862] Re-enter Gratiano.] Theobald. om. Qq Ff and Knight.

[6863] _Behold,_] _Lo!_ Pope.

[6864] _I have_] _I've_ Pope.

[6865] _I have made_] _I made_ Pope. _I've made_ Theobald.

[6866] _your_] _you_ Q₁.

[6867] _Be ... wench!_] Omitted in Q₁.

[6868] _And_] Ff. _The_ Q₂ Q₃.

[6869] _Now, how_] _Now: how_ Ff. _Now--how_ Rowe. _How_ Q₂ Q₃.

[6870] _compt_] _count_ Q₁. _'count_ Jennens.

[6871] _Even ... devils,_] Divided as by Qq Ff. The first line ends
_chastity_ in Capell, reading with Ff.

[6872] _cursed_] Qq. _cursed, cursed_ Ff.

[6873] _ye_] Ff. _you_ Qq.

[6874] _roast_] _and roast_ F₃ F₄.

[6875] _steep-down_] Hyphened in Ff.

[6876] See note (XV).

[6877] Enter ... prisoner.] Malone, after Capell. Enter Lodovico,
Montano, Iago, and Officers, Cassio in a Chaire. Q₁. 'Iago' is omitted
in Q₂ Q₃. Enter Lodovico, Cassio, Montano, and Iago, with Officers. Ff.
Enter Lodovico, Cassio led in wounded, Montano, and Jago Prisoner, with
Officers. Rowe.

[6878] SCENE X. Pope.

_unfortunate_] Ff. _infortunate_ Qq.

[6879] [pointing to his Wife. Capell.

[6880] _Where ... forth._] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_that_] Ff. _this_ Q₁.

[6881] _that_] om. Q₁.

[Wounds Iago.] Othello wounds Jago. Rowe. om. Qq Ff.

[6882] _Wrench_] _Wring_ Q₁.

_I bleed_] _Ay, bled_ Maginn conj.

_bleed, sir, but not_] _bleed, but am not_ Hanmer.

[6883] _wert_] Qq. _was_ Ff. _wast_ Rowe.

[6884] _damned_] Qq. _cursed_ Ff.

[6885] _shall_] Ff. _should_ Qq.]

_thee?_] Qq F₄. _thee._ F₁ F₂ F₃.

[6886] _did I in_] Qq. _I did in_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _I did_ F₄.

[6887] _never gave_] Ff. _did never give_ Qq.

[6888] _your_] Ff. _you_ Qq.

[6889] _I_] om. Q₁.

[6890] _my soul_] _me, soul_ Anon. MS. (pencil). See note (IV).

[6891] _Sir,_] As in Qq. A separate line in Ff.

[6892] _not_] om. Johnson.

_Here is_] _here's_ Pope.

[6893] _the one_] _one_ Pope.

[6894] _The ... Roderigo._] As in Ff. One line in Qq.

_undertook By_] _undertooke--by_ Q₁.

[6895] _O villain_] _O villainy_ Ritson conj. _Villany_ S. Walker conj.

[6896] _interim_] _nicke_ Q₁.

[6897] _the_] Qq. _thou_ Ff.]

_caitiff_] F₄. _caitiffe_ F₁ F₂ F₃. _catieffe_ Qq.

[6898] _that handkerchief_] _a handkercher_ Q₁. _a handkerchiefe_ Q₂ Q₃.

[6899] _wife's_] _wifes_ Qq. _wives_ Ff.

[6900] _but_] Capell. _it_ Q₁. _it but_ Ff Q₂ Q₃.

[6901] _upbraids_] _obraides_ Q₂ Q₃.

_Iago_] _Iagos_ Q₃.

[6902] _but_] om. Rowe (ed. 2).

_spake_] _speake_ Q₃. _said_ Anon. apud Rann conj.

[6903] _For_] _Fore_ Q₃.

[6904] _bring_] Ff. _bring him_ Qq. _bring them_ Collier MS.

[6905] _before you go_] Omitted in Q₁.

[6906] _I have_] _I've_ Pope.

[6907] _me as I am_] _them as they are_ Q₁.

[6908] _Nor ... speak_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

_then must you_] _then you must_ Q₂ Q₃. _you must_ Seymour conj.

[6909] _jealous_] _Iealious_ F₁ F₂.

[6910] _Perplex'd_] _Perplext_ Qq. _Perplexed_ Ff.

[6911] _Indian_] Qq F₂ F₃ F₄. _Indean_ F₁. _Judian_ Theobald.
_Egyptian_ Upton conj. See note (XVI).

[6912] _subdued_] om. Pope.

[6913] _Drop_] _Drops_ Q₁ F₁.

[6914] _medicinal_] _medicinall_ Qq. _medicinable_ Ff.

_gum_] _gums_ Johnson.

[6915] _Where_] _When_ Collier MS.

_turban'd_] _Turband_ (in italics) Q₁. _Turband_ (in roman) Q₂ Q₃.
_Turbond_ (in roman) Ff.

_turban'd Turk_] _Turband Turke_ Qq. _Turbond-Turke_ F₁ F₂.
_Turbond-Turk_ F₃ F₄.

[6916] _traduced_] _reduc'd_ Johnson.

[6917] _by the throat_] _by throat_ Capell.

_circumcised_] _uncircumcis'd_ Brady conj.

[6918] [Stabs himself.] He stabs himselfe. Qq. om. Ff. Pulls out a
conceal'd Dagger, and stabs himself. Capell. Wrenches a sword from a
by-stander, and stabs himself. Anon. conj.

[6919] _that's_] Qq. _that is_ Ff.

[6920] [To Desdem. Theobald. Falling upon Desdem. Johnson. Throwing
himself by his Wife. Capell.

[6921] [Falls....] He dies. Qq. Dyes. Ff. Dies on the bed. Collier
(Collier MS.)

[6922] [To Iago] Theobald.

_Spartan_] F₂ F₃ F₄. _Spartane_ Qq. _Sparton_ F₁.

[6923] _tragic_] _targicke_ Q₃.

_loading_] Ff. _lodging_ Qq.

[6924] _This ... sight;_] One line in Qq. Two in Ff.

[6925] _seize_] Ff. _ceaze_ Qq.

[6926] _on you_] Ff. _to you_ Qq.

[6927] _censure_] _fensure_ Q (1695).

[6928] [Exeunt.] Ff. Exeunt omnes. Qq.




NOTES.


NOTE I.

I. 1. 16. The punctuation in the text was first given by Steevens
(1773). Most editors following Capell, including Steevens in his later
editions, have supposed 'for, certes' to be part of Othello's speech.
Mr Collier, omitting the comma, gives 'For certes' as the commencement
of Othello's words. There is no comma in either Quartos or Folios, and
the printing leaves it uncertain where the quotation is meant to begin.


NOTE II.

I. 1. 20, 21. Theobald marks 'Certes ... officer,' and 'the
Florentine's ... wife' with inverted commas, to indicate that they
are Iago's report of Othello's speeches, and supposes Iago to be the
'fellow almost damn'd in a fair wife.' 'The Poet means,' he adds,
'_Iago_ had so beautiful a Wife, that she was his _Heaven on Earth_;
that he _idoliz'd_ her; and forgot to think of Happiness in an
After-state, as placing all his Views of Bliss in the single Enjoyment
of her. In this sense, _Beauty_, when it can so seduce and ingross
a Man's Thoughts, may be said _almost to damn_ him.' Warburton's
explanation agrees substantially with that of Theobald.


NOTE III.

I. 3. 370-374. The reading in the text is that of the second and third
Quartos. The first Quarto has:

    '_Iag._ Go to, farewell:--doe you heare _Roderigo_?

    _Rod._ what say you?

    _Iag._ No more of drowning, doe you heare?

    _Rod._ I am chang'd.       _Exit Roderigo._

    _Iag._ Goe to, farewell, put money enough in your purse:
    Thus doe I euer make my foole my purse:'

The first Folio, followed substantially by the rest, reads:

    '_Iago._ Go too, farewell. Do you heare, _Rodorigo_?

    _Rod._ Ile sell all my Land.          _Exit._

    _Iago._ Thus do I euer make my Foole, my purse:'

Rowe and Pope follow the Folios.

Theobald has:

    '_Iago._ Go to, farewel. Do you hear, _Rodorigo_?

    _Rod._ What say you?

    _Iago._ No more of drowning, do you hear.

    _Rod._ I am chang'd; I'll go sell all my land.              [_Exit._

                             _Manet_ Iago.

    _Iago._ Go to, farewel, put mony enough in your purse--
    Thus, &c.'

Hanmer:

    '_Iago._ Go to, farewel. Do you hear, _Rodorigo_?
    No more of drowning.

    _Rod._ I'll sell all my land.                               [_Exit._

                               SCENE XI.

                             _Manet_ Iago.

    _Iago._ Thus,' &c.

Warburton follows Theobald, and so does Johnson, except that he
transfers 'Exit Rodorigo' to follow the first line of Iago's speech,
and makes Scene XI. begin with the next. Capell reduces the whole to
the following:

    '_Iag._ Go to, farewel.

    _Rod._ I'll sell all my land.                               [_Exit._

    _Iag._ Thus,' &c.


NOTE IV.

III. 3. 116. In the Devonshire copy of the first Quarto there is a
marginal stage direction in a 17th century hand opposite this line,
'With admiring action.' Some other stage directions and readings quoted
in our foot-notes as 'Anon. MS.' are from the same source. More than
one hand seems to have been employed, and there are other notes of a
much later date in pencil.


NOTE V.

III. 3. 153. Johnson attributes the reading 'improbably' to what he
calls 'the old Quarto.' We have not found it in any copies.


NOTE VI.

III. 3. 172. In the Devonshire copy of the first Quarto, which formerly
belonged to Steevens, and which was the original of his reprint, the
word 'loues' is partially obliterated by being changed with a pen to
'hates', but being still obscure 'hates', is written in the margin
opposite in the same hand as the stage direction mentioned in note IV.
Capell's copy has distinctly 'loues', and that this was originally
the reading of the Devonshire copy is evident from the traces of the
letters which still remain. Two lines above, opposite 'make,' a late
hand has written in pencil 'muck' (which is Becket's conjecture) in the
Devonshire copy. We have no means of ascertaining whether this note was
written before or after the publication of Becket's work.


NOTE VII.

III. 3. 405. Capell prints the words: 'What then? how then? Where's
satisfaction?' in italics, to indicate that Iago is repeating what
Othello had said.


NOTE VIII.

IV. 1. 207, 208. The first Folio reads as follows:

    '_Iago._ I warrant something from Venice,
    'Tis _Lodouico_ this, comes from the Duke.
    See, your wife's with him.'

The other Folios have substantially the same reading, except that the
second has '_Lodovico_, this, comes, &c.,' and the third and fourth
'_Lodovico_, this comes, &c.'

Hanmer has:

    '_Iago._ I warrant you 'tis something come from Venice.
    Oh! it is _Lodovico_ from the Duke:
    And see, your wife is with him.'

We have given in our text the reading of the Quartos with Theobald's
punctuation.


NOTE IX.

IV. 2. 55, 56. The first Quarto has:

    'A fixed figure, for the time of scorne,
    To point his slow vnmouing fingers at--oh, oh,'

The second and third have the same except that they substitute 'finger'
for fingers. The first Folio, which is followed substantially by the
rest, has:

    'The fixed Figure for the time of Scorne,
    To point his slow, and mouing finger at.'

Rowe:

    'A fixed Figure for the hand of Scorn
    To point his slow and moving Finger at--.'

He is followed by Pope, Theobald, and Hanmer.

Warburton also follows Rowe, except that he reads 'unmoving' for 'and
moving.'

Johnson, Capell and Jennens adopt Warburton's reading.

Capell puts 'O! O!' in a separate line.

Steevens reads with the second and third Quartos, followed by Malone,
Rann and the _Variorum_ Editors.

Malone conjectures:

    'A fixed figure for the scorn of time
    To point his slow unmoving finger at,--'

Mason proposes 'slowly moving' for 'slow unmoving': a conjecture which
has been also made by Mr Collier's MS. corrector and adopted by Mr
Collier in his second edition.

Becket conjectures:

    'A fixed figure and in scorn, for time
    To point his slow-unmoving finger at.'

Jackson:

    'A fix'd figure, for the type of scorn
    To point his low unmoving finger at.'

Mr Knight, in his 'Stratford' Edition, and Mr Staunton adopt Hunter's
conjecture:

    'The fixed figure of the time, for scorn
    To point his slow and moving finger at,--'

Mr Grant White, in his _Shakespeare's Scholar_, expressed his approval
of this conjecture, changing however, 'and moving' to 'unmoving'
in the second line. In his edition he follows, as we do, the second
Quarto. 'The time of scorn' (he says) is a phrase like 'the day of
sorrow,' 'the hour of joy,' or 'the age of progress.'

Dr Cartwright reads:

    'A fixed figure for the time of scorn
    To point his cold unmoving finger at.'

Mr Bailey conjectures:

    'A fixed figure for the time, in scorn
    To point his sly and mocking finger at.'

Mr Bullock proposes to read:

    'A fixed figure for the rhymer's scorn,
    To point his foul unmoving finger at.'


NOTE X.

IV. 2. 183. Mr Collier says that the Devonshire copy of F₁ has the
following: 'I have heard too much: And hell gnaw his bones
Performances....' The mistake was discovered and corrected in other
copies. This accounts for the 'and' which the corrected copies still
retain instead of 'for.'


NOTE XI.

IV. 3. 46-48. In this passage we have followed Capell's arrangement of
the text. The second Quarto has:

        '_Sing willow_, &c.         (Lay by these.)
        _Willow, willow._
    (Prethee hie thee, he'll come anon.)'

The third Quarto has the same arrangement, but misprints
_'fling-willow, &c._'

The first Folio reads:

    '_Sing Willough, &c._          (Lay by these).
    _Willough, Willough._        (Prythee high thee: he'll come anon).'

The second, third, and fourth Folios have 'Lady by these,' a misprint
which was corrected by Rowe in his first, but repeated in his second
edition. Pope, Theobald, Hanmer, and Warburton omitted the words
altogether.


NOTE XII.

V. 2. 7. Rowe, in his first edition, printed the line thus:

    'Put out the Light, and then put out the Light,'

and, in his second,

    'Put out the Light, and then put out _the_ Light,'

in which he was followed by Pope, except that the latter put a
semicolon at the end of the line. Theobald, punctuating thus,

    'Put out the light, and, then, put out the light;'

supposes that the only light in the room is that which Othello carries
in his hand, and which at first he intends to extinguish, but,
changing his mind, sets down to go and kiss Desdemona. He observes,
'The _Players_, in all the Companies wherever I have seen this Tragedy
perform'd, commit an Absurdity here, in making Othello put out the
candle, which, 'tis evident, never was the Poet's intention.'

Hanmer prints:

    'Put out the light: and then--put out _thy_ light.'

Opposite line 13 he adds this stage direction, '_Sets down the Candle,
not putting it out._'

Warburton has:

    'Put out the light, and then--Put out the light?--'

His punctuation is adopted by Johnson.

Capell reads:

    'Put out the light, and then--Put out the light!'

and adds after the next line, as a stage direction, '_Setting down the
Taper._'

Mr Goldwin Smith, regarding the line in question as a stage-direction
which has crept into the text, suggests to us that the passage ought to
be printed as follows:

    'Yet she must die, else she'll betray more men.'

                     [_Takes off his sword and then puts out the light._

    'If I quench thee, thou flaming minister, &c.'

or thus:

    '................................alabaster.'

                                                 [_Takes off his sword._

    'Yet she must die, else she'll betray more men.'

                                                  [_Puts out the light._

    'If I quench thee, thou flaming minister, &c.'


NOTE XIII.

V. 2. 86. Mr Singer, in his second edition, has here invented a
reading of the first Quarto, from a misinterpretation of Steevens's
note. He says, 'After this speech of Othello, the elder Quarto adds
an invocation from Desdemona, consisting only of "God! God! God!"'
Steevens's words, which Mr Singer adopted in his first edition, were
'consisting only of the sacred name thrice repeated.'


NOTE XIV.

V. 2. 243. Mr Collier in his _Notes and Emendations_ and in the
appendix to _Coleridge's Lectures_ gives 'now' as the insertion of his
MS. corrector. In the note on this passage in his second edition of
_Shakespeare_, he says: '_Here_ in this line is omitted in the Folio,
1623, but inserted in the corr. fo. 1632.'


NOTE XV.

V. 2. 284, 285. The reading given in the text is that of the Quartos,
substantially. The first has literatim thus:

    'O _Desdemona_, _Desdemona_, dead, O, o. o.'

The second and third:

    'O _Desdemona_, _Desdemona_; dead, O, o, o.'

The first Folio:

    'Oh _Desdemon_! dead _Desdemon_: dead. Oh, oh!'

The second:

    'Oh _Desdemon_! dead _Desdemon_: dead. dead. Oh, oh!'

The third:

    'Oh _Desdemona_! dead _Desdemona_: dead, dead. Oh, oh!'

This is followed substantially by the fourth Folio and Rowe.

Pope reads:

    'Oh _Desdemona_! _Desdemona!_ dead, dead! Oh! Oh!'

This is adopted by Theobald, Hanmer, Warburton and Johnson.

Capell reads:

    'O _Desdemone_! dead, _Desdemone_? dead? dead?
    O, o, o!'

Steevens (1773) has:

    'Oh Desdemona! Desdemona! dead!
    Dead! oh! oh! oh!'

This reading is followed by Steevens himself in his later editions,
Malone, Rann, the _Variorum_ editors, Singer and Harness. Mr Knight
reads substantially with the first Folio: Mr Collier follows the
Quartos.

Mr Dyce reads:

    'O Desdemon! dead, Desdemon! dead! O!'

Mr Staunton adopts the reading of the first Folio, putting a comma
after the first 'dead.' Mr Grant White follows Mr Dyce.


NOTE XVI.

V. 2. 350. In his note on this passage Theobald says, 'I have restor'd,
_Judian_, from the Elder _Quarto_, as the genuine and more eligible
reading.' All the Quartos we have seen read 'Indian.' He adds, 'I am
satisfied, in his _Judian_, he is alluding to _Herod_; who, in a Fit of
blind Jealousie, threw away such a Jewel of a Wife as _Mariamne_ was to
him.' This interpretation was suggested by Warburton.

'Indian' is read by the Quarto of 1695, Rowe, Pope, Capell, Jennens,
Rann, Knight, Collier, Dyce, Singer (ed. 2), Delius, Staunton, Cowden
Clarke, Hudson and Grant White.

'Judian' or 'Judean' is read by Theobald, Hanmer, Warburton, Johnson,
Steevens, the _Variorum_ editors, Harness and Singer (ed. 1).

              CAMBRIDGE: PRINTED AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS.





    Transcriber's Notes:


    P. xix addenda incorporated in text.

    Retained line wrapping in plays to retain prose line numbering.

    Converted linenotes to footnotes with anchors at line ends.

    Retained incorrect line numbers, e.g. there are often more than
    5 lines (or occasionally less than 5) between increments of 5.

    Anchors assigned to linenotes without line references.

    Silently corrected simple spelling, grammar, and typographical
    errors.

    Retained anachronistic and non-standard spellings as printed.

    Enclosed italics markup in _underscores_.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Works of William Shakespeare
[Cambridge Edition] [Vol. 8 of 9, by William Shakespeare

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WORKS OF WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE VOL 8 ***

***** This file should be named 49008-0.txt or 49008-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/9/0/0/49008/

Produced by Richard Tonsing, Jonathan Ingram and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

